  12 Years a Slave john ridley and Steve McQueen based on the book "12 Years a Slave" bySolomon Northup
05.18.11FADE IN:EXT. ANIMAL PEN - DAYWe are outside of a smallish animal pen.  It sits in back of some wooden structures.  The build and design is that of early 19th century American.  It would pass for urban and commercial as opposed to agrarian.  Within the pen we see SEVERAL SHEEP grazing.Into the pen walks a BUTCHER.  He is a white man in his mid-forties.  Without any particular regard he takes up one of the sheep, and wrestles it into a shack-like structure.INT. ABATTOIR - LATERThe shack is a smallish abattoir.  We see the Butcher sitting on a bench next to the sheep.  With sheers in hand, the Butcher clears the wool from the sheep.Once the sheep is clean, in a very matter of fact manner, the Butcher binds the sheep's rear legs, slits its throat, then hangs it upside down allowing for the animal to bleed out.  The butcher then pulls the intestine from the animal immediately after slaughter while the gut is still hot.  These bundles are put into large containers and await collection by the DRESSER. INT. DRESSER'S - DAYWe see now the DRESSER taking the casings from a pot of cold water.  He then removes all membranes except for the muscle fibers.  The casing is now ready for sorting; the casing is checked for length, color and general condition.Selected casings are grouped together in HANKS.INT. STRING MAKER'S - DAYWe see now a STRING MAKER working with the hanks, using a BLADE to split them into RIBBONS.  The next step is to whiten the gut with sulphur fumes before they are combed through straightening the ribbons.Lastly, the String Maker takes some strings and WRAPS THEM IN A VERY NEAT LITTLE PACKAGE. EXT. STREET - AFTERNOONThe String Maker walks the package along the streets of Saratoga, New York.  It is best known as the location that British General John Burgoyne surrendered to American General Horatio Gates at the end of the Battles of Saratoga on October 17, 1777, often cited as the turning point for the United States during the American Revolutionary War. The town line is formed by the Hudson River and is the border of Washington County. Fish Creek, a tributary of the Hudson River, is the outflow of Saratoga Lake.  It is a fairly modern township, but in the middle 1800s it is far from pristine.  THERE IS MUD AND MANURE EVERYWHERE, AND IT IS NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE TO KEEP ANYTHING CLEAN.  This state, however, is the norm for the era and goes uncommented upon.The String Maker arrives to a TOWNHOUSE.  Using a KNOCKER that hangs at the door he raps, then calls to the occupant:STRING MAKERMr. Northup?  Are you there Mr. Northup?INT. TOWNHOUSE/STUDY - LATERWe are close on a PAIR OF HANDS.  BLACK HANDS.  They unwrap the package and display the strings.WE CUT TO the hands stringing a violin.  It's not a high end piece, but it is quite nice.WE CUT TO a wide shot of the study.  Sitting in a chair with violin in hand is SOLOMON NORTHUP; a man in his late twenties.  Everything about Solomon, his mein and manner, is distinguished.  But he, too, seems a hardy individual.  Someone who has known manual labor in his time.Solomon begins to lightly play his violin, as if testing the strings, their tuning.  Satisfied, Solomon begins to play vigorously.  As he does, we make a HARD CUT TO:   INT. HOUSE/LIVING ROOM - EVENINGWe come in on a lively affair.  A dinner party is being thrown with the confines of a fairly stately house.  In attendance are EIGHT COUPLES.  All are WHITE and all are FAIRLY YOUNG, in their early twenties.  The men and women are dressed in very fine attire.  We should get the sense that for the most part they are people of means.The furniture has been set aside in the living room.  At the moment the couples are engaged in the dancing of a REEL.  Most likely they would be dancing "the reel of three," in which, as the name implies, three dancers weave in and out of one another, completing a figure 8 pattern on the floor, usually in six or eight bars of music.The music they are dancing too is being played by Solomon, having cut directly from the tune he was previously playing.  He plays with a light determination, and in no way seems possessed with empty servitude.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   2.Solomon concludes the reel, and the dancers break into enthusiastic applause, which is followed by thanks and congratulations by the group.  It should be clear that despite their respective races there is much admiration and appreciation for Solomon's abilities.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE/BEDROOM - MORNINGIt is a Saturday morning.  Clad in her "finest attire" is ANNE; Solomon's wife.  A few years younger than Solomon.  She is lighter in color than Solomon as well.  We see also the Northup children: ELIZABETH, who is ten,  MARGARET, eight and ALONZO who is five.  They are handsome, and well groomed kids.  Anne straightening up the children.  She finishes, she rises up and stands behind them, almost as if preparing to pose for a portrait.  They all wait a moment, then Solomon enters the foyer.  He stands, and looks admiringly at his family.  ADMIRINGLY stressed.  It isn't that he doesn't have love for them, he does as well.  But in the moment, he truly admires his greatest accomplishment: a family that is healthy and well and provided for.  He goes to his children, and hands each a coin.He moves, then, to Anne.  Gives her a kiss on the cheek.  The children giggle at the sight.EXT. STREET - DAYSolomon and his family are now out walking along the streets and groves of Saratoga. The streets are well populated this morning with many people out strolling.  Most are WHITE, but there are BLACKS as well.  They are FREED BLACKS who mingle fairly easily - though not always completely - with the whites.  We see, too, a few BLACK SLAVES who travel with their WHITE MASTERS.  These pairings are largely from the south and - despite the fact the blacks are slaves - they are not physically downtrodden, not field hands.  They are well dressed and "leading apparently an easy life" - comparatively speaking - as they trail their masters.Among the slaves, we see one in particular; JASPER.  As he trails his MASTER he can't help but note Solomon and his family as they make their way INTO A STORE.  His intrigue of this most handsome and harmonious group should be obvious.  With his Master occupied, Jasper moves slyly toward Parker's store.  Clearly his intent is to have dealings with the Northups.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   3.INT. STORE - LATERWe are inside the store of MR. CEPHAS PARKER, a supplier of general goods.  Solomon greets him with:SOLOMONMr. Parker.PARKERMr. Northup.  Mrs.  Northup.Though little is stated, their is clearly familiarity among them.With money in hand the Northup children move quickly about the store looking for items to purchase.At the checkout counter sits a portrait of WILLIAM HENRY HARRISON, the edges draped in black crepe.  Before the book sits a LEDGER.  Mr. Parker asks of Solomon:PARKER (CONT'D)If you would, Mr. Northup, sign our condolence book.  My hope is to find a way to forward it to the Widow Harrison.  Sad days for the nation.SOLOMONBut brighter times ahead.As Anne looks over some silks and fabrics, Solomon eyes a new violin.  He asks of Parker:SOLOMON (CONT'D)May I?PARKERIt would be my pleasure.  Could I trouble you for a waltz, sir?Solomon does a quick tuning of the instrument, then into a waltz; lively and well played.  The Elizabeth and Margaret clasp hands and dance.  There is laughter and smiles.As Solomon plays, Jasper enters the store.  He stands for a moment, again in seeming admiration of Solomon.  While far from pathetic, Jasper is the definition of a subservient man.As Solomon concludes to the applause of Parker and the children:JASPERSuh...  A word, suh?  I could not help none but take note of yahself and yah family as yah made yah way.  My congratulations to yah.  Yah Missus and chil'ren be very 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   4.
(MORE)handsome 'n must be'a great regard.  My name, suh, is Jasper.  I am travelin' to Saratoga with my massa.  Massa Fitzgerald.  And I will insist to yah, suh, that I am well provided fo'.  Yah can see that jus by my adornments.  And I never want for no meal or 'fo warmth at night.  Massa Fitzgerald is a fine man.  Very fineJasper looks to Parker, then steps closer to Solomon and speaks a bit conspiratorially.  The following comes from him as though it is a thought he has wrestled with for some time:JASPER (CONT'D)But it is my desire I should not spend my life in his servitude.  It is my quiet desire that I should have a missus of my choosin', raise up young'n and provide 'fo 'em as I sees fit.  It is a desire I keep inside me, and easily so, when I am south.  Freedom at best a fleetin' notion.  But on travels north, if I can be true; I can hardly contain my wantin' for liberty.  I am anxious for it.  I am anxious to escape.  But I am anxious all the same of the punishment that would attend my recapture.  My question to you, suh, is of the best and surest method of effecting my flight.SOLOMONThe only answer I can give...  Watch your opportunities and strike for freedom.JASPERWhat opportunities?  And how shall I take advantage of them?Solomon isn't sure how to respond.  It's easy to speak of freedom, but not how it is gained.  WE HEAR THE BELL AT THE DOOR.  It's Jasper's Master.  He's stern, clearly displeased.FITZGERALDJasper!  Jasper, come along.(to Parker)I apologize for any intrusion, sir.SOLOMONNo, intrusion.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   5.JASPER (CONT'D)Fitzgerald looks to Solomon.  It is a cold glare as though he wasn't speaking to, and has no interest in a response from a black man.  Looking back to Parker: FITZGERALDGood day, sir.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE/DINING ROOM - EVENINGThe family now sits around the dinner table, the meal mostly finished.  Solomon, the very definition of a man in repose - sits at the head of the table reading from a NEWSPAPER.  He reads to the rest of the family solemn news of the funeral arrangements for the recently deceased President Harrison.SOLOMON"Thus has passed away from earth our late President.  His voice was still fresh in the ears of his countrymen when it was hushed in death.  The tongue of calumny had not time to poison his fame.  He has passed from the praise of men to receive the plaudit of his heavenly Father.  Let us in this bereavement bow meekly to the divine will, and hear the voice of the Sovereign of the Sovereign saying be still and be with God."A long moment of quiet, the family continuing to eat.  Then, from Elizabeth:ELIZABETHWill you read it again?Solomon starts from the top of the article.SOLOMON"During the morning, from sunrise, the heavy bells had been pealing forth their slow and solemn toll while the minute guns announced that soon the grave would receive its trust.  Our city as well as our entire nation has been called to weep over the fall of a great and good man.  One who was by the wishes of a large majority of our people raised to fill the highest place of trust within their gift.  William Henry Harrison, the first chief magistrate who has died during his term of service."  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   6.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE/CHILDREN'S ROOM - NIGHTThe children are put to bed by both Solomon and Anne.  They are tucked in, and each given a kiss good night.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE/BEDROOM - NIGHTSolomon and Anne are now preparing for bed themselves.  Anne washing her face in a basin as Solomon changes into his night clothes.  The limited interaction of the two should be very perfunctory.  Like many married couples they've just become very accustomed to one another.  EXT. NORTHUP HOUSE - MORNINGWe are just outside the Northup house.  A CARRIAGE waits with a DRIVER.  Anne and the children are dressed for travel as the Driver loads bags into the carriage.Anne gives her husband a kiss.SOLOMONTravel safely.ANNEStay safely.Anne and the children load up.  The Driver chides the horse, and the carriage heads off.  Solomon waves a hearty good bye to his wife and children.EXT. STREET - DAYSolomon is now out for a stroll.  As he crosses near MR. MOON'S TAVERN, he passes two men - two in particular - who stand outside conversing with MR. MOON himself:  MERRILL BROWN and ABRAM HAMILTON.  Brown is about 40, with a countenance indicating shrewdness and intelligence.  Hamilton is closer to 25, a man of fair complexion and light eyes.  Both are finely, if perhaps a bit garishly, dressed.  Hamilton, as Solomon describes him, slightly effeminate. Moon, spotting Solomon: MR. MOONCall the Devil's name...  There he is now.  Mr. Northup...  I have two gentlemen who should make your acquaintance.  Messrs. Brown and Hamilton.  BROWNSir.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   7.MR. MOONMr. Northup, these two gentlemen were inquiring about distinguished individuals, and I was just this very moment telling them that Solomon Northup is an expert player on the violin.HAMILTONHe was indeed.SOLOMONMr. Moon is being overly gracious.BROWNTaking into consideration his graciousness and your modesty, may we trouble you for a moment of your time to converse, sir?INT. MR. MOON'S TAVERN - LATERWe make a jump cut into the tavern.  Solomon, Brown and Hamilton are sitting at a table.  Brown and Hamilton drink lightly.  Solomon abstains.SOLOMONA circus?HAMILTONThat is our usual employee.  The company currently in the city of Washington.BROWNCircus too constricting a word to describe the talented and merry band with which we travel.  It is a spectacle unlike most have ever witnessed.  Creatures from the darkest Africa as yet unseen by civilized man.  Acrobats from the Orient able to contort themselves in the most confounding manners.  Men of great strength...  HAMILTONAnd Mr. Brown himself; an internationally renowned pantomimist.BROWNYou are too kind.HAMILTONAs your talents are too great.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   8.BROWNWe are on our way thither to rejoin the company having left for a short time to make an excursion northward for the purpose of seeing the country, our expenses paid by an occasional exhibition.  HAMILTONThe reason for our inquiry with Mr. Moon...BROWNYes.  We had just a devil of a time in procuring music for our entertainments.  Men of true talent seemingly in short supply.  As we were discussing our predicament, Mr. Moon suggested we make acquaintance with you, praising your skills at every opportunity.SOLOMONGentlemen...BROWNWe offer this, desperate as we are; If you could accompany us as far as New York...  We would give you one dollar for each day's service and three dollars for every night played at our performances.  In addition we would provide sufficient pay for the expenses of your return from New York here to Saratoga.HAMILTONAn opportunity to see the country with the occasional exhibition from which to accrue expenses.  If there is any way in which you would give consideration to the offer...SOLOMON(enthusiastically)I will give more than consideration.  I will agree.  Immediately.  The payment offered is enticement enough, as is my desire to visit the metropolis.Both Brown and Hamilton display broad smiles:HAMILTONWe are delighted, sir.  So delighted.  Though we would add that our travel plans--12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   9.BROWNWe would like to depart with haste.  However, it is understood if there are arrangements you need to attend to.SOLOMONAs luck would have it, my wife and children are traveling.  I will write her of our plans, then we may go.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE/BEDROOM - LATERBack in his house, we see Solomon packing: putting some clothes in a travel case, and collecting his violin as well.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE/STUDY - LATERSolomon sits down to write a letter; pen poised over paper with already a few lines written.  But Solomon thinks better of it.  WITH LITTLE THOUGHT HE TEARS THE PAPER AND SETS IT ASIDE.  WE SHOULD GET THE SENSE THAT THE ABSOLUTE VALUE OF BEING ABLE TO COMMUNICATE BY LETTER IS LOST ON SOLOMON.  THIS FACT WILL HAVE GREAT WEIGHT IN THE NEAR FUTURE.EXT. NORTHUP HOUSE  - LATERSolomon is exiting.  Brown and Hamilton are waiting.  They ride in a covered carriage led by a pair of "noble" horses.HAMILTONNo letter to post?SOLOMONNo need.  My return would be as soon as my family's.BROWNWe're off then.INT. PUB - EVENINGWe find ourselves in a roadside pub.  It serves the purpose of drinking and diversion, and little more.  This is the locale at which Brown and Hamilton are currently engaged in putting on one of their "entertainments."We see Hamilton at the door, collecting receipts.  WHAT LITTLE AUDIENCE THERE IS, IS ALREADY IN PLACE.  There is nothing more for Hamilton to collect.  Brown is at the head of the space entertaining a PARSE AUDIENCE AND NOT 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   10.OF "SELECT CHARACTER."  Solomon provides the music on his violin.  As Solomon plays, Brown goes through and act of pantomiming the throwing of balls, dancing on a rope, frying pancakes in a hat, causing invisible pigs to squeal.  Basically it's some pretty lame stuff.  Not nearly the calibre one would expect to find as part of a great "carnival."INT. BOARDING HOUSE - LATERSolomon, Hamilton and Brown sit down to eat.  Hamilton and Brown drink, but again Solomon abstains.  Though Solomon remains cool, Hamilton and Brown put up a great show of being disappointed as Hamilton counts out what little money was collected.HAMILTONIf it's not anything, it's next to it.  BROWNI have not seen an audience so sparse...HAMILTONNot an additional tip from a one of them.  They expect to be entertained for nothing.BROWNAnd not satisfied a bit despite giving them more than what they paid for.SOLOMONIt's the national mood.  There's too much grief to make room for frivolity.BROWNI think we won't see a true audience until Washington.  We should make it our objective to return with all due speed.HAMILTONMy sincerest apologies, Solomon.SOLOMONNo need.HAMILTONYou were promised opportunity, and you were given none.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   11.BROWNThe opportunity is with the circus.  A two man show poorly promoted, what were we to expect?  But the circus bills itself.HAMILTONTrue.BROWNIt arrives to each town with a hoopla and leaves with a flourish.HAMILTONVery true.BROWNAnd with the summer season approaching its tour will be vigorous.  I have told you of the circus with which we are connected.  Creatures from the darkest of Africa.  Acrobats from the Orient who-- SOLOMONYou have described it, yes.BROWNMagical.  It is simply magical.  A constant whirlwind of sights and sounds.  All witnessed by a crush of humanity, excitement spilling from their hearts.  Yes.  We need to return immediately to Washington.  Solomon...I believe us familiar enough now, but forgive me if I am bold...would you consider making the trip with us?  Solomon gives a bit of a laugh at the idea.BROWN (CONT'D)I realize our promises have fallen short to this point, but I can guarantee high wages and an enthusiastic audience.  HAMILTONEntertaining at pubs and inns has it's place, but a man of your skills deserves better.BROWNHear, hear.HAMILTONAnd more importantly you would build your own name and following.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   12.
(MORE)The circus tends to attract those with the highest of reputations.  An introduction here and there could amount to a lifetime of reward.  Now would be the time.  With your family away, an opportunity presents itself.  BROWNSaid as fellow artists as well as a businessmen.  Well worth the effort at least.Solomon considers...  Clearly their aggrandizing has an effect on Solomon.SOLOMONYou present a flattering representation.  How can I say no?HAMILTONOh, very good, sir.  Very good.  I cannot recall being so excited.BROWNThere is a practical concern.  If you are to continue one with us you should obtain your free papers.SOLOMONNot necessary.BROWNHere in New York, no.  But we will be entering slave states and as a matter of precaution...  It's to all our benefit we should not have to come to account for your well being.HAMILTONSix shillings worth of effort could well save much trouble later.BROWNWe'll go to the Customs House in the morning, then travel on.  Good business all around.INT. CUSTOM HOUSE - MORNINGWe are in a PORT-SIDE BUILDING housing the offices for the government officials who process paperwork.  Solomon is filling out paperwork as Hamilton and Brown watch.  A CUSTOMS OFFICIAL transcribes the information into a sizable ledger.  He stamps the paper, then hands it back to Solomon.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   13.HAMILTON (CONT'D)CUSTOMS OFFICIALYour free papers, Mr. Northup.Finished, the Official walks the ledger back to a row of shelves, and replaces the book among MANY, MANY others.  Though Solomon gives it no thought, it's a little daunting to consider how precarious his freedom is once consigned to this ledger. EXT. WASHINGTON - DAYFar from the bureaucratic seat of government it is now, the Washington of the era is as much swampland as city.  Still, the elements that are urban are extraordinary.  The Capital Building, the White House...  At this time the Washington Monument would not yet have been constructed.  At the moment the populace is displaying both sorrow and anticipation.  Sorrow for the loss of the President and anticipation of his funeral.  Many are dressed in black, and black crepe hangs nearly everywhere.  As well, there are portraits of Harrison at varying locations.Having arrived in Washington, Solomon, Hamilton and Brown RIDE IN ON THEIR CARRIAGE.INT. GADSBY HOTEL/DINNING ROOM - EVENINGIt is a fairly nice hotel.  Solomon, Hamilton and Brown are among several parties eating a meal in the hotel's dinning room.  As with seemingly everywhere in the city black crepes accessorize the background.  Brown counts out $43.00 on the tabletop.  IN COIN.  Solomon is astonished by the amount.BROWNForty-three dollars.  All to you.SOLOMONThat...it's far more than my wages amount to.BROWNAn advance from the circus.  I cannot tell you...I honestly wish you had seen the expression of our director when I described your abilities.  He was fairly overcome with excitement.HAMILTONYou should have invited him to sup with us.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   14.BROWNI did.  I did, but so many preparations before the company is to depart.SOLOMONGentlemen--BROWNOf which I have other news, only slightly distressing.  Our departure is delayed by a day--HAMILTONOh, Dear...SOLOMONYou have already been far to generous.BROWNBut only a day.  All the confusion with tomorrow's procession makes departure difficult.  Solomon, if you can tolerate us a day more... HAMILTONOh, yes, Solomon, you did want to see the city.  And how could we make our way without seeing the great man pass?  One more day, Solomon.  Will you stay on?Relenting, but happily so:SOLOMONWhat can I say but yes?EXT. WASHINGTON AVENUE - DAYIt is the day of the funeral procession.  Despite the pall, there is, too, a great pageant on display.  Harrison is, after all, the first American Head of State to die while in office.  There is the roar of cannon and the tolling of bells. We see the FUNERAL PROCESSION: carriage after carriage in long succession with thousands following on foot - all moving to the sound of melancholy music.  Though solemn, it is very much parade like with the populace pushing and shoving to get a better look at the procession as it passes.  Solomon, Hamilton and Brown among them.INT. PUB - LATERA decent though crowded, smoke-filled joint.  Very lively.  Solomon is with Hamilton and Brown, who again 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   15.drink.  Solomon seems far more interested in heading out to take in the city.  The pair must talk over the crowd:SOLOMONMay we see the President's House?HAMILTONEh?SOLOMONYou said yesterday we might go and visit--HAMILTONFar too crowded at the moment.  We have time for that, Solomon.  All day.  A great man has passed.  Remember him with a drink.Both Hamilton and Brown hold up their canters to drink.  Solomon, a bit reluctantly, does the same.BROWNAnother.  Our departed President deserves all the salutation we can imbibe.Hamilton and Brown drink again, and Solomon does as well.EXT. ALLEY - LATERWE MAKE A HARD CUT to Solomon outside of the Pub, in an alley, with Brown and Hamilton.  He is violently ill, hunched over and retching horribly.HAMILTONThat's all right Solomon.  No shame in it.  No shame at all.SOLOMONI'm not...uugh...not much of a drinker.HAMILTONJust let those ill feelings out.BROWNSuppose we won't be going to the Presidential Mansion.  Shame.HAMILTONIt is.  Tis a damn shame.  All the more if Solomon can't summon himself.  We need to get you to where you can rest.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   16.INT. GADSBY HOTEL/SOLOMON'S ROOM - NIGHTHamilton is placing a spittoon near Solomon's bed, where a prone and reeling Solomon lays.  Hamilton sits on the bed.  As he strokes Solomon's sweaty face, Hamilton speaks sweetly.HAMILTONI'm afraid that Brown and I haven't brought you much luck.  But rough waters bring smooth sailing.  Eventually they do. SOLOMON....So...so sorry...HAMILTONShhh.  We won't hear it.  We won't.BROWNLet him sleep.HAMILTONHmm.  A good night's sleep.  And tomorrow...tomorrow you will feel as well and refreshed as though the earth were new again.Hamilton lingers a bit too long and a bit too close to Solomon for Brown's taste.  With more than a bit of signification:BROWNHamilton!  Nothing more we can do for him.Displaying an odd sort of disappointment, Hamilton slinks away from the bed.  He crosses to, and BLOWS OUT A CANDLE.  The room goes dark with a blackness more than night.  Brown and Hamilton exit.  Solomon lays in the dark and moans.  His sounds becoming MORE AND MORE DISTRESSED.  It's a wonder if he can make it through the night.INT. GADSBY HOTEL/HALLWAY - LATERThe door to Solomon's room creeps open.  Disheveled, Solomon ekes out into the hallway.  His clothes are soaked with his own sweat and stained with vomit.  Gingerly, unsteadily, Solomon makes his way through the space.  The hotel seeming oddly - and creepily - empty at the moment.  Eventually, Solomon arrives to a KITCHEN where he comes upon some "COLORED" SERVANTS.  Solomon does everything in his power to right himself.  Despite being sweaty and covered in his own bile, Solomon works - actually struggles - to make himself seem presentable. 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   17.SOLOMONWater, please.  May I have water?A FEMALE SERVANT pours a glass of water which Solomon gulps down, spilling as much on himself as actually taking in.GADSBY SERVANTMore, sir?Again working to be proper:SOLOMONIt's sufficient.As he came in, Solomon makes the same effort to propel himself from the space.INT. GADSBY HOTEL/SOLOMON'S ROOM - LATERSolomon is back in bed.  From his moans and cries it is quite plain that a single glass of water was not sufficient to ease his pain by any means.  From the noises he makes, Solomon sounds as though he's in a fever dream.As Solomon reels, THE DOOR TO HIS ROOM OPENS.  THREE FIGURES ENTER.  Backlit as they are, we cannot discern their features.  We can tell only that they are men of decent size.  They take hold of Solomon and carry him away, Solomon too weak and feverish to resist.  THE DOOR CLOSES RETURNING THE ROOM TO DARKNESS.INT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - MORNINGSolomon stirs, then slowly awakes to his new circumstances.  He finds himself in a nearly lightless room about twelve feet square with walls of solid masonry.  There is a thick and well-locked door, a small window covered with iron bars and a shutter.  The only furniture is a wood stool and an old fashioned, dirty box stove.  As Solomon rises he sees that he is in chains, his HANDS CUFFED - the chain running to a bolt in the ground - and his LEGS IN IRONS.  At first Solomon is incredulous.  But that emotion is replaced first by fury and then panic.  He begins to pull on the chains, fight against them.  He does so with increasing desperation.  Solomon flails about, the sounds of the steel chains whipping and beating against the masonry.  He grunts and screams without regard as the cuffs and irons bite into his flesh, but he cannot pull himself free.After several minutes of intense effort, Solomon tires, slows, then finally he collapses.  And in this collapsed state he remains.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   18.INT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - LATERSolomon again awakens.  He hears sounds beyond the door...footsteps.  Eventually the door opens.  Enter JAMES BURCH - who runs the slave pen - and EBENEZER RADBURN who works as a turnkey and overseer.As the door opens, this is the first light to seep into the otherwise near-black room.  The shine is painful to Solomon's eyes.  With no salutation whatsoever, Burch asks:BURCHWell, my boy, how yah feel now?Solomon rises up as best he can.  With all the resolve he can put together he states what he considers to be fact:SOLOMONI am Solomon Northup.  I am a free man; a resident of Saratoga, New York.  The residence also of my wife and children who are equally free.  I have papers.  You have no right whatsoever to detain me--BURCHYah not any--SOLOMONAnd I promise you - I promise - upon my liberation I will have satisfaction for this wrong. BURCHYah no free man.  And yah ain't from Saratoga.  Yah from Georgia.A moment.  Not a word spoken among the trio, but Solomon and Burch do some serious eye fucking, neither man yielding.  Burch says again:BURCH (CONT'D)Yah ain't a free man.  Yah nothin' but a Georgia runaway.  Burch waits for Solomon to acquiesce.  Solomon does not in any way.  Both men exchange a long and daring stare.  They are clearly at an intellectual stand off.  Burch, leans to Radburn, SAYS SOMETHING WHICH WE CANNOT DISTINGUISH. Radburn exits the room, his physical absence is a long moment.  But all the while WE CAN HEAR Radburn's footfall and his rummaging in the next room.  The unseen is disquieting.Finally Radburn returns with a pair of "instruments:" a paddle - the flattened portion, which is about the size in circumference of two open hands, and bored with a 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   19.small auger in numerous places.  He also carries a whip.  A cat-o-nine tails; a large rope of many strands.  The strands unraveled and a knot tied at the extremity of each.  Burch says again:BURCH (CONT'D)Yah a runaway nigger from Georgia.Solomon stands with a quiet stoicism.  He will say nothing of the kind.As that is the case, Solomon is seized by both men, and roughly divested of his clothing.  He is pulled over the bench, face downward.  Radburn then STEPS ON HIS CHAINS holding Solomon down in a bent position.With no preamble, Burch begins to beat Solomon about the back with the paddle.  Burch strikes him wordlessly - no taunting, no sneering.  Solomon screaming against each blow.  His back immediately SWELLING WITH WELTS AND BRUISES.  This beating continues on and on and on until quite literally Burch WEARS HIMSELF OUT with the effort.  Dripping in sweat and panting:BURCH (CONT'D)Yah still insist yah a free man?SOLOMON...I...I insist...Burch regrets hearing this.  Not from sympathy, but rather because he's nearly too tired to go back to beating Solomon.  Yet, as if returning to work, Burch returns to pummeling Solomon.  This time Burch punctuates the blows with:BURCHYah a slave.  Yah a Georgia slave!Burch continues to strike, and strike...  This time until the paddle SNAPS IN HALF.  Burch then GRABS THE WHIP.  Hardly missing a stroke, he whips Solomon relentlessly, the flails cutting into Solomon's back.  Again, Burch's arm tires before Solomon "breaks."  BURCH (CONT'D)Are yah slave?SOLOMON...No...BURCHAre yah slave!Nothing from Solomon.  Burch goes back to whipping and whipping, and whipping...  SOLOMON'S BACK IS NOW TORN OPEN WITH LACERATIONS AND OOZING WITH BLOOD.  Finally 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   20.Burch can whip no more.  As he pours sweat and sucks air he chastises a limp Solomon:BURCH (CONT'D)I don't want to hear any more shit about you bein' "entitled" to your freedom, about being kidnapped or anythin' whatever of the kind.  I swear what yah jus' got'll pale to what ya'll receive.Taking up their instruments Burch exits.  Radburn lingers for a moment. He takes the irons off Solomon's legs.  Opens the window some.  As he makes these gestures, in a patronizing and confidential manner, one wrought with poor sincerity::RADBURNI seen a good many of the black kind just where yah're; on the floor face down and back bleedin'.  Sick.  Make me sick.  Often times the situation was resolved, and I think; what was all the beatin' and abuse for?  Things end as they should, and the violence was for naught.  So why cause trouble when they ain't no cause for it?  Be of a cooperative nature, and things don't need be particularly unpleasant.(beat)Or, yah can carry on like yah been, and I fear yah won't live to see Sunday next.  With that thought, Radburn exits.  Solomon rests.  But to rest seems like giving in to defeat.  He begins pulling on his chains.  But for all his struggling, the chain loosens none.  Solomon calls out:SOLOMONHelp me!  Someone help me!If anyone at all hears him, they do not respond.  Solomon continues his plaintiff cry for assistance.EXT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - CONTINUOUSBeginning with a TIGHT SHOT on the shuttered, barred window of Burch's dungeon - Solomon's cries barely eking beyond the space - THE CAMERA PULLS BACK from the building, onto the city until clearly visible is the Nation's capital.  It's icon's of freedom - the WHITE HOUSE, the CAPITAL BUILDING - fairly mocking Solomon's captivity.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   21.INT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - DAYIT IS DAY NOW.  The door to the yard is thrown open.  The harsh white light floods all over Solomon.  He steps out into a YARD.EXT. BURCH'S DUNGEON/YARD - CONTINUOUSIt is a yard just beyond Burch's.  The yard is hemmed in by a brick wall.  In the yard are two men, and a boy.  The oldest is CLEMENS RAY a man of about 25 years of age.  He is well educated, but overwhelmed with fear by the situation.  JOHN WILLIAMS is about 20 years old.  He is born and bred a slave, and is lacking in education.  Finally there is a child about 10 years of age who answers to the name of Randall.  Randall is running around the yard chasing a butterfly.For a long moment the three men just stare at each other, wary of one another.  Though they are clearly in similar circumstances, for the moment they choose to keep their distance.Radburn is ever present, though he remains off to one side.Randall runs up to Solomon, asks rather innocently:RANDALLDo you know when my mama will come?Solomon doesn't know what to say.  Before he has a chance to answer Radburn crosses over and shoos Randall away.RADBURNGet away from him.RANDALLWhen will my mama come?RADBURNYah hear?  Get.Randall runs off.  The three men maintain their distance.INT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - EVENINGRadburn brings food into Solomon, the shriveled meat and some water.  Just barely enough to sustain Solomon.  This time Radburn also has a SHIRT.RADBURNBrought a shirt.  That old thing of yours is just rags and tatters.  Need something proper to wear.Solomon doesn't move for the clothing.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   22.RADBURN (CONT'D)Go'won.  Put it on.With slow defiance, Solomon does as instructed.  He removes what remains of his old shirt - the one he was wearing when first kidnapped - and puts on the one Radburn brought him.  The shirt's ill-fitting and dirty.  Despite that, Radburn says:RADBURN (CONT'D)There.  Tha's fine.  Tha's fine.  Got no gratitude?SOLOMON...Thank you...RADBURNYah keep bein' proper, yah'll see how things work out.Radburn starts to take the old shirt.SOLOMONNo!  It was from my wife.RADBURNRags and tatters.  Rags and tatters.Taking the shirt, the "rags and tatters" as he calls them, Radburn exits, locking the door behind him.  Solomon sits with the plate of food before him.  He pushes the plate away rather than eat.EXT. BURCH'S DUNGEON/YARD - DAYSolomon, Clemens Ray, John and Randall are in the yard.  ALL STAND NAKED.  Though they try to cover their privates a bit, they are all aware of the uselessness of modesty.  Radburn is present.  He has before him A COUPLE OF BUCKETS OF COLD WATER.  He throws water on the naked men.  RADBURNGo on.  Warsh up.The men, soaking in humility as well as water, begin to scrub with A SINGLE HARSH BAR OF SOAP passed among them.RADBURN (CONT'D)The boy, too.  Get him clean.Solomon takes some soap and rubs it over Randall.RADBURN (CONT'D)Scrub now.  Git 'em clean.Solomon scrubs harder.  Randall - clearly cold and uncomfortable - begins to cry, becoming nearly inconsolable.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   23.RANDALLMama...!  Mama!  Is she going to come?RADBURNHush him up!Doing all he can to spare the child from a certain beating:SOLOMONQuiet, please.RANDALLMama!RADBURNShut him up!Saying anything to keep the boy quiet:SOLOMONYour mother will come, I swear she will, but you must be silent.  Please.  Be silent!On the seeming strength of Solomon's promise, Randall goes silent.  Solomon looks to Radburn, who just throws water on the soapy men.INT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - EVENINGAgain Solomon sits alone in his dungeon.  Again a plate with a shriveled piece of meat is brought in by Radburn and set before him.  And yet again Solomon pushes the plate away.  A moment after Radburn leaves, then Solomon PICKS UP THE PORK AND BEGINS TO FEED ON IT.  It's as if he's resigned himself to his circumstances.  As he eats on the meat we hear:SOLOMON (V.O.)This can't stand.  It is a crime.EXT. BURCH'S DUNGEON/YARD - DAYSitting together out in the yard are Clemens Ray, John and Solomon.  Over time they have drawn trustworthy enough to speak with one another.  At the moment Solomon is still trying to apply reason to the situation.  Randall wanders about in the background.  As usual, he calls out for his "Mama."  By now, however, his calls should feel like little more than background noise.  SOLOMONI believe now someone lay in wait for me.  My drink was altered...  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   24.
(MORE)We are free men.  They have...they have no right to hold us.  Solomon waits for a response from the others.  They give none.SOLOMON (CONT'D)We need a sympathetic ear.  If we have an opportunity to explain our situation, it is impossible for me to believe men could be so unjust to detain us as slaves once the truth of our case is known.CLEMENSWho in your estimation is that sympathetic ear?SOLOMONThe two men I journeyed with; Brown and Hamilton.  I'm certain they're making inquires at this very moment.CLEMENSI would be just as certain they are counting the money paid for delivering you to this place.SOLOMONThey were not kidnappers.  They were artists.  They were performers.CLEMENSYou know that?SOLOMONI...I have no reason to--CLEMENSYou know for certain who they were?FLASHBACKVery quickly, we get an MOS glimpse from Solomon's POV of BROWN PERFORMING BACK AT THE TAVERN.  His act is shit, and with 20/20 hindsight perhaps it is even a bit shittier than we recall.  The man an artist?  Hardly.EXT. YARD - CONTINUOUSSolomon's got to reconcile that recollection of his.  Brown sure wasn't a performer of any merit.  More like a charlatan.  As Solomon considers that fact, Clemens states very plainly:12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   25.SOLOMON (CONT'D)CLEMENSHow I reckon the situation: whatever past we had...well, that's done now.  The reality to come is us being transported southward.  New Orleans if I were to venture.  After we arrive, we'll be put to market.Clemens Ray chokes a bit.  The horrid fate waiting for them becoming quite clear to him.CLEMENS (CONT'D)Beyond that...  Well, once in a slave state I suppose there's only one outcome.John's anxiety grows.JOHNNo.CLEMENSI don't say that to give you empty agitation...JOHNFor y'all.  For y'all they ain't nothin' but that!  But John was'n kidnapped.  John bein' hold as debt, tha's all.  Massa pay his debt, and John be redeemed--CLEMENSBoy--John is nearly beside himself with panic.JOHNNow John's...John's sorry for y'all, but tha's how it be.  Where y'all goin', yah goin' witout John.  Massa take care of me.  Massa take care.RANDALLMama!All three men turn and look.  At the moment Randall doesn't call out emptily.  At the door to the yard is Burch along with two women.  One in her late twenties; ELIZA.  She is "arrayed in silk, with rings upon her fingers, and golden ornaments suspended from her ears."  Though a slave, Eliza was a mistress and has - to this point - lived well.  This is reflected in her airs and her speech.  The other is a little girl, light in skin color, of about seven or eight.  This is EMILY, Randall's half sister.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   26.As she enters the yard Eliza squeals with high delight, then breaks into tears of both sorrow and joy.  Clearly this is mother and child being reunited.As Burch locks the yard door, Eliza clutches both her children.  She is overcome with emotion.ELIZAMy darlings.  My sweet, sweet babes.INT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - EVENINGLater in the evening.  Solomon now shares his space with Eliza and her children.  As the children rest, Eliza drops into a lament as if pleading her case to Solomon who lends a sympathetic ear.ELIZAPoor innocent things.  They know nothing of the misery they are destined to endure.  The years previous will have been bliss by comparison.Both slyly, and with a bit of aggrandizement:ELIZA (CONT'D)I had my master's favor, do you understand?  Above even his own wife, I had it.  Do you know that he built a house for me?  Built it only on the sole condition that I reside there with him.  The added promise in time I would be emancipated.  And for nine years he and I cohabited.  And in that nine years he blessed me with every comfort and luxury in life.Displaying the finery she still wears:ELIZA (CONT'D)Silks and jewels and even servants to wait upon us.  Such was our life, and the life of this beautiful girl I bore for him.  But Master Berry's daughter...she always looked at me with an unkind nature.  She hated Emily no matter she and Emily were flesh of flesh.  As Master Berry's health failed, she gained power in the household.  Eventually, I was brought to the city on the false pretense of our free papers being executed.  On our arrival, instead of being baptized into the family of the free, we were delivered into stricter bondage.  If I had known 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   27.
(MORE)what waited I would not have been brought here alive.  I swear that.Eliza looks to Solomon.  But there is no response that comes easily on the heels of all that's been said.  All they can do is share Eliza's lament.  She turns to her children, says again:ELIZA (CONT'D)My poor children.  My poor, poor babies.BLACKINT. BURCH'S DUNGEON - NIGHTIt's the deep of night, all are sleeping.  A KEY TURNS IN THE LOCK AND THE DOOR OPENS.  Burch enters with Radburn beside him.  Both carry LANTERNS with them.  Hardly giving Solomon and Eliza a moment to rouse themselves, Burch demands: BURCHCome on.  Get yer blankets.  Get up.Sensing that things will not end well:ELIZANo, please don't...BURCHI don't want to hear yer talk.  Get in the yard.ELIZAPlease...Radburn, stepping in, seeming reasonable:RADBURNAin't no need for all that.  Yah frightenin' the chil'ren.Putting hand to Randall's head.RADBURN (CONT'D)Jus takin' a li'l trip, tha's all.  Don't want to frighten the chil'ren none over a li'l boat ride, do yah?Eliza gives a shake of her head to the negative.RADBURN (CONT'D)Alright then.  Git yerselves up.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   28.ELIZA (CONT'D)EXT. BURCH'S DUNGEON/YARD - NIGHTWe now have Solomon, Clemens, John, Eliza and the children.  They are being cuffed together.  As John is cuffed, he pulls back.  Scared.  He beings in desperation:JOHNJohn's massa gunna pay his debt.  John's massa gunna come for him.Not wanting to hear any of this talk, Burch strikes John several times in the head with a sap-like instruments.  Weakened, but again:JOHN (CONT'D)John's massa gunna--Burch again strikes John until he's quiet.  Curiously, Emily and Randall don't even flinch.  Why would they?  They are quite used to seeing this kind of violence.BURCHNot a word out of none a yah.  Not a word.EXT. STREET - NIGHTQuite literally in the manner of thieves in the night, Burch and Radburn hustle along their stolen "property."  The streets are deserted.  There is no one to help Solomon and the others if they tried.  The group is taken down to a wharf and a waiting STEAMBOAT.EXT. ORLEANS - CONTINUOUSThe slaves are taken quickly up a gangplank and onto the boat as the CAPTAIN AND CREW WATCH, but do not interfere.INT. ORLEANS/HOLD - NIGHTThe slaves are hustled down into a dark, dank hold among barrels and boxes of freight...and RATS, where they are chained to the hull of the ship.  Burch comes around and "checks" the chains; makes sure they are all secure and locked.  Satisfied, he heads up out of the hold.  Radburn follows.  Alone in the dark in the hold, Clemens Ray cries, as does Eliza.EXT. ORLEANS - NIGHTThe crew casts off, and the steamboat launches, setting off down the Potomac into the night.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   29.EXT. RIVER - MORNINGBy the first rays of the new morning sun, we see the steamboat making its way down the river. THE SHORELINE LINED WITH GREENERY.INT. ORLEANS/HOLD - MORNINGRadburn removes the shackles from the slaves and they are  taken up to the deck.I/E ORLEANS/DECK - CONTINUOUSThe slaves are brought over to a small table on deck.  They are seated, and are served food by a MULATTO WOMAN.  On occasion WHITE PASSENGERS make their presence known.Burch comes around to the slaves, a bottle of liquor in hand.  He offers a drink to each of the men.BURCHDrink?The men know better than to demur, and take what's offered.  Burch plays coy, then pours a healthy-sized drink and offers it to Eliza.  The salaciousness of the act cannot be hidden.BURCH (CONT'D)It's good.  Nothing harsh.She drinks, and Burch pours her another.  Clearly Burch is trying to get her greased up.ELIZANo.  No more, thank you.Unhappy with the outcome of his efforts, Burch sulks away.  The Mulatto woman could not help but overhear.  Drawing close to Eliza, offering what she considers sage advice on the sly:  MULATTO WOMANYou should cheer up.  Don't do to be so down cast.  Take what's offered.  Things needn't be no harder than they are.  And if you're wise...and I can see by your wares that you are...  Well, a wise woman makes her situation as pleasant as she can.  For herself...Stroking Emily's hairMULATTO WOMAN (CONT'D)For her child...12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   30.Eliza slaps the woman's hand away.ELIZADon't touch her!  She will not be like you.MULATTO WOMANThen she be a slave.  Like you.EXT. NORFOLK/PORT - DAYThe Orleans arrives to Norfolk and is docked.  MORE SLAVES - about 15 in all, of various genders and ages - are brought on board.  Chief among them is ARTHUR, who fights viciously with his captors.  His face swollen and covered with wounds and bruises.  One side of it is a complete raw sore.  "With all haste" is shoved down into the hold.Another among them is ROBERT, who is about 19 years of age.  He, like Solomon, is quiet.  And like Solomon as well we can tell there is much going on behind his eyes; a good deal of silent plotting.Having taken their cargo as far as they care or need to, Burch and Radburn depart.  They do so without a word spoken to Solomon or the others.With this new and sizable batch of slaves on board, the crew again CASTS OFF, and the Orleans makes its way again.Solomon stares down Burch for as long as he can, as if wishing bad things.  As if wanting to exact some measure of revenge.  But the greater insult is that Burch and Radburn, engaged in conversation, take no notice of Solomon whatsoever.  He is that insignificant to them.  That fact, that reality, makes Solomon boil with a rage he cannot express in words.I/E. ORLEANS - DAYAs the brig sails, the slaves are seated and huddle on deck.  The CAPTAIN, along with his first mate - BIDDEE - move among them, looking them over for prospects to do labor.  He demands of one MALE SLAVE:CAPTAINStand up.Immediately, and with much trepidation, the slave does as told.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)What can you do with yourself?REEDI can...I can clean.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   31.CAPTAINYou can clean?  Mr. Biddee, get a mop in this one's hands and get him to swabbing.BIDDEESir.The Captain continues to move among the slaves.  Arriving to another:CAPTAINGet up.Again, and quickly, the slave does as ordered.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)What can you do with yourself?GEORGEI'm a carpenter.CAPTAINGot no need for that.  Two weeks to New Orleans, you will find a way to make yourself useful.GEORGEI am able with a needle and thread.  Any mending that you might--CAPTAINShovel coal is what you can do.  Get him below, Mr. BiddeeThe Captain keeps on until he arrives to ROBERT:CAPTAIN (CONT'D)Stand up.Unlike the others, Robert makes no move to stand right away.  With more assertion:CAPTAIN (CONT'D)Get up.Robert stands, but does so with little alacrity.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)What can you do with yourself?In quiet defiance Robert doesn't say a word.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)Answer me!ROBERTKnow how to cook.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   32.CAPTAINLet me see your hands.Robert does as instructed and holds out his hands.  The Captain looks them over.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)Clean enough.  Get on to the galley and make yourself of use.Robert moves away as the Captain continues on to Solomon.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)Get up.Solomon doesn't move.  The Captain is clearly getting tired of the mounting disrespect.  He announces to the remaining slaves:CAPTAIN (CONT'D)The next one of you that refuses me will be bound and thrown overboard, I promise you that.  Get up!Solomon rises.CAPTAIN (CONT'D)What can you do?SOLOMONI play the fiddle.CAPTAINGot no need for that.  What else?SOLOMONSome farm labor from my youth.  As I young man I worked a gang that rebuilt a canal.CAPTAINAs useless to me as fiddling.  Jack of all trades and master of none.  You can carry a load, can't you?SOLOMONYes.CAPTAINThen do it.  You'll haul from the hold to the galley, and clean it when you're done.  Mr. Biddee, another for your charge.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   33.INT. ORLEANS/GALLEY - LATERAs slaves cook, Solomon cleans.  He he scurries around gathering up scraps and places them in a box.  As he cleans, Solomon watches as Robert preps the food.  Robert obviously quite comfortable with a knife.  He goes about his work with both speed and skill.I/E. ORLEANS - EVENINGSolomon is now up on deck emptying his box, throwing waste over the side of the vessel.INT. ORLEANS/HOLD - LATERDown in the hold the slaves eat, pray.  SOME ARE SEA SICK AND THEY THROW UP.  Among all this, Arthur sits and talks with Solomon.  They are removed from the others, as much as they can be, and they are conspiratorial as Arthur tells the tale of how he came to be a captive.ARTHURThey was a gang of 'em.  A true gang.  My mistake: shortenin' my way home on an unfamiliar street.  Well, they set right upon me.  For whatever reason, they seen me and think I was low fruit.  No, suh.  Was no such a thing.  I commence to swingin'.  The resonance of every blow again' 'em a reminder of the family I would never again see if'n they prevailed.  I fought 'em.  Fought those damned kidnappers until all my strength left me.  Fought 'em right to they beat me senseless.  And here I was drug, and here I was dumped.  They got no right to me.  I'm free.  Free as them.SOLOMONDo you think we can make ourselves free again?  Do you think we can escape?Arthur says nothing.  He just gives a look to Solomon as if he's interested in listening to whatever Solomon has to say.SOLOMON (CONT'D)The crew is fairly small.  They don't seem particularly game.  Do you think we can commandeer the ship?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   34.ARTHURI know we git where we travelin', we'll wish we'd died tryin'.  If we did take her, where'd we sail?SOLOMONNew York harbor.ARTHURcan you get us there?SOLOMONI can make every effort.Arthur considers things for a moment.ARTHURThere's the Captain, the Mate...  I count six sailors.  If we tried for them one by one...SOLOMONWhat would we do?  Once we've seized the crew; what would we do with them?Very plainly:ARTHURWe kill 'em.This sinks in for a moment, but clearly it is the only way.SOLOMONHow would we take them?ARTHURFirst in the mornin'.  We'd be on them before they knew what; quick and merciless.  Captain and mate first.  Waylay 'em, the others won't be given ta fight.SOLOMONThey will if they know death waits for them.ARTHURThey won't know.  The ones we don't kill right off, we tell 'em they can have their lives if they submit.  Question of when.SOLOMONAs soon as we can.  As soon as tomorrow.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   35.ARTHURTheir guard is high.  Oughta wait for when they're not suspecting.  It's two weeks sail to New Orleans.  In five days, six days...SOLOMONAll that much farther south.ARTHURAnd they be all the more tired and incautious.  Make the chore easier.Solomon considers this.  It makes some sense.  There remains, however, an issue in his mind:SOLOMONWe need a third.  Even with luck on our side, two can't stand against eight.  We have to bring another into the conspiracy.Arthur looks around at the other slaves.  He is unimpressed by their nature.ARTHURThey's niggers.  Born and bred slaves.  Cringe at so much as a white man's look.  Not one's got stomach enough fo the fight.  Not a damn one.SOLOMONWe need another.  Two alone will not succeed.  With three we are nearly guaranteed.Solomon looks among the salves.  There must be at least one more who's capable of mutiny.  Clemens Ray...?  John...?  Doesn't seem that way.INT. ORLEANS/GALLEYSolomon is back cleaning in the galley.  As he cleans, he again watches Robert prep food.  Robert's skill with a knife is not lost on Solomon.I/E. ORLEANS/DECK - LATERIt's now Solomon, Arthur and Robert talking, Robert having evidently been brought into the conspiracy.  Robert seems a little sweaty.  Not nervous.  Literally a light but constant sheen of sweat covers him.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   36.SOLOMONCaptain and the mate sleep in the same cabin.  The cook always sleeps in the galley, and crew's in the forecastle.ARTHURWe two, steal into the captain's cabin, be done with them.(to Robert)We get you a weapon.  Sharp, blunt...don't matter.  Wait outside the crew cabin.  Comes to it, you haveta hold 'em back 'til we can come.ROBERTAfter the deed, who'ta pilot us?ARTHURSolomon.ROBERTYa'ever pilot a boat?SOLOMONWe head north.  That's all that's required.ARTHURThen we're agreed.  No turning away now.ROBERTWhen?ARTHURThree days.  The morning of the Sabbath.    INT. ORLEANS/GALLEY - DAYAgain we see Robert and Solomon working in the galley.  Robert doesn't look well.  He sweats more than when we just previously saw him.  Despite how he might feel - as Solomon cleans around him - Robert is capable enough to secret a knife into Solomon's garbage box.EXT. ORLEANS/DECK - LATERWe see Solomon emptying the box overboard.  As he does, he collects the knife - looks it over for a moment as if imagining killing with it - then quickly secrets it away.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   37.INT. ORLEANS/HOLD - DAYWe see Robert down in the hold.  Sweating profusely now, he is also stained with vomit.  The Captain is looking Robert over as Biddee stands close by.  THE CAPTAIN PULLS BACK ROBERT'S SHIRT REVEALING A RASH, HIGHLIGHTED BY RAISED PAPULES.  The Captain knows exactly what he's looking at.  With fear:CAPTAINSmall pox.This strikes all around like lightning.  Like a curse that has fallen.  The Captain states again:  CAPTAIN (CONT'D)It's smallpox.(to Bidee:)Get lime spread through the hold.  Keep them on deck, and for God's sake keep them away from us.BIDDEESir.EXT. ORLEANS/DECK - LATERThe slaves are mostly huddled.  THEY ARE WATCHED OVER BY THE CREW.  As things are, there will be no chicanery.INT. ORLEANS/HOLD - LATERA couple of days on now.  Robert lays on a blanket down in the hold.  He is a really, really pitiful sight, his body covered with pustules.  Solomon keeps clear of Robert, but sits with him.  Between wheezing breathes, he says very weakly:  ROBERTSolomon...  Solomon...SOLOMONYes?ROBERTI be right soon.  I be right, then we do as planned.Solomon doesn't respond.  He continues to maintain his vigil with Robert.EXT. ORLEANS/DECK - DAYDays later now.  We are back up on the deck of the ship.  ROBERT'S STILL BODY IS BEING SEWN INTO A BLANKET.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   38.Clearly he didn't make it, the ravages of the pox having done horrid work on his flesh.  Once sewn into the blanket.  CREWMEN Then dump the body over the side of the ship.  Solomon watches as the body churns for a moment in the wake of the vessel...then sinks beneath the water.  Arthur, with no sentimentality:ARTHURBetter off.  Better than us.Solomon continues to stare back at the spot where Robert was dumped as it slips further and further away.From his pocket he takes the knife.  He holds it for a moment, then lets it slip into the water.  There is nothing to be done with it.BLACKEXT. NEW ORLEANS/PORT - DAYThe Orleans arrives to the port of New Orleans and docks.  The port is one of the busiest in the young nation, vessels of every shape and size, and flying a variety of flags arrive here.  On the dock itself there is a bustle of activity as goods are loaded and unloaded.  It's a bit of controlled chaos as a VARIETY OF LANGUAGES are spoken and shouted.Two men - among many - are awaiting the arrival of the Orleans.  They are WILLIAMS - Arthur's master - and DAVIS who is the solicitor of Mr. Williams.  They both look like they mean business.  The moment the gangplank is laid they bum rush the vessel, Williams yelling for Arthur.WILLIAMSArthur...!  Arthur!Arthur, seeing his master, is nearly crazy with delight.  He is, uncharacteristically beside himself.  Ironically, his master now represents "freedom."ARTHURMy master.  Master Williams, sir!  Master Williams!Arthur pulls on his chains for Williams, nearly pulling the other slaves with him.Davis is no nonsense about the situation.DAVISWho is in charge of this vessel?CAPTAINI am the Captain.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   39.DAVISI am the solicitor of Mr. Jonus Williams.  I have documentation verifying that the Negro named Arthur is his property.CAPTAINI know nothing of--DAVISYou are ordered by court to return that property immediately, or face charges of thievery.CAPTAINMy duty is to transport goods.  I am not responsible for their origin.ARTHURSir...WILLIAMSIt's all right, Arthur.  Your abductors have been arrested and confined...(to the Captain)Remove these contraptions!To his mate:CAPTAINFree him!Biddee does as ordered.  Once free, Arthur hugs and sobs over his master as would a lost and then found child.  WILLIAMSIt's all well, now, Arthur.  You will return home with me.DAVISConsider this notice and warning.Williams, Davis and Arthur head from the ship.  Solomon rushes to the rail of the ship.  He seems both desperate and hopeful of some aid from Arthur and Williams.  But there is none forthcoming.  Williams and Arthur continue on - Arthur not so much as even looking back in Solomon's direction.  Solomon stands and watches as they fade into the environs and are gone from sight.EXT. ORLEANS/DECK - LATERHours later.  The slaves sit on the deck, baking in the sun, awaiting their fate.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   40.THEOPHILUS FREEMAN - a tall, thin-faced man with light complexion and a little bent - moves along the deck calling out names from a list.FREEMANPlatt...  Platt!  Platt! None of the slaves respond to him.  He begins calling other names.  The slaves STAND as they are called.  FREEMAN (CONT'D)Lethe.  Clemens Ray.  Eliza.  Randall.  Emily.  John.  Platt...  Platt!Freeman looks around.  He spots Solomon.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Captain, who shipped that nigger?CAPTAINBurch.Freeman steps to Solomon.  He gives him a looking over.FREEMANStand up.Solomon does as told.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Yah fit the description given.  Why didn't Yah answer when called?SOLOMONMy name is not Platt.  My name is--Freeman strikes Solomon hard across the face.FREEMANYer name is Platt, and I will learn yah yer name so that yah don't forgin' it.(to the Captain)Shackle my niggers.  Get 'em to my cart.I/E. CART - LATERSolomon is carted off along with the rest of "Burch's stock:" Eliza and her children, Clemens Ray, John and Solomon.  As they travel for the first time Solomon sees true and severe slavery.  These are not the visiting servants, such as Jasper was back in Saratoga.  These are humans held in strict bondage - herded like cattle, working in "chain gangs."  Slaves are evident not merely by the color of their skin.  The residue and accessories of 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   41.slavery are everywhere.  Blacks almost universally display scars - THICK AND HEAVY DEAD TISSUE FROM LACERATIONS THAT WERE LEFT UNTREATED - brands and are often missing limbs.  Blacks are held in all kinds of shackles, from simple chains to elaborate bindings, to neck collars that are spiked.  Some are muzzled or forced to wear bits.  THESE IMAGES SHOULD BE A CONSTANT AND CONTINUAL CANVAS TO THE PIECE.  EVER PRESENT, BUT NOT REALLY COMMENTED ON AS THEY ARE THE NORM.  They should be a reminder that not only are people being oppressed, but that there is an entire system of oppression in place.  EXT. FREEMAN'S SLAVE PEN - LATER"Burch's stock:" arrive at Freeman's slave pen.  They are led in by Freeman and his "HOUSE SLAVE" BOB - a mulatto slave.   The yard is enclosed by plank, standing upright, with ends sharpened instead of brick walls as with Burch's.  Including Burch's group there are about 30 SLAVES in the pen.Solomon and the others look around and see nothing but downtrodden and despondent faces who quietly stare back at this new batch of arrivals.EXT. FREEMAN'S SLAVE PEN - LATERThe slaves are in various states of undress, men and women alike.  They clean themselves, scrubbing with soap and water.  Women wash their hair.  Men shave.  Freeman walks among them, inspecting them as they primp themselves.EXT. FREEMAN'S SLAVE PEN - LATERThe slaves are given new clothes.  The men are given hat, coat, shirt, pants and shoes.  The women frocks of calico and handkerchiefs to bind about their heads.INT. FREEMAN'S/GREAT ROOM - LATERIt's an odd, ironic scene.  The slaves are in a large and fairly ornate room within Freeman's house.  Bob plays a tune on a fiddle - background music - as Freeman tries to line up the slaves.  It has the air of an etiquette class, though what Freeman is trying to do is coach the slaves into being more "sellable."  He works with them in groups of five or so.FREEMANTallest to smallest, understand?  Are yah taller than her?TALL SLAVEYes, sir.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   42.FREEMANThen yah'd go before her, wouldn't yah?TALL SLAVEYes, suh.FREEMANThen do it.  Move.INT. FREEMAN'S/GREAT ROOM - LATERFreeman continues to instruct.  He talks with a slave, a boy in his teens, with much condescension.  As before, Bob plays a tune.  Solomon, moment by moment, become more and more disgruntled by the playing.FREEMANWhen yer called, do yah jus' shuffle over?  No.  No, yah do not.  Yah move sprightly, understand?The slaves nod.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Lemme see yah do it.  C'mon, boy.The slave moves to Freeman quickly.  Freeman smiles, rubs the slave's head.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Tha's a boy.  (to all)Yah see how this boy moves?  Sprightly.  Now, g'won back over there.INT. FREEMAN'S/GREAT ROOM - LATERThe instruction from Freeman continues, as does the fiddling by Bob.  FREEMANKeep your head up.  A sense of direction; that's how yah look smart.  None of those saucer eyes.  Rid yourself of that smile.  Look like a goddamn grinnin' monkey.  Put the least thought in yer head.  C'mon, now.  Think of somethin'.  As weary as he can be of Bob's playing, Solomon moves to Bob, he asks:SOLOMONCan you play a reel?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   43.Bob, dismissive:BOBNah.  I don't know no reel.SOLOMONIf I may...?Bob, looks to Freeman:FREEMANHe sick a yah caterwauling.  Let him play, boy.  Le's see what he can do.Bob reluctantly hands the fiddle over to Solomon.  Solomon tunes it a bit, then begins to play.  His fingers stiff at first, he takes a moment to warm up.  But as he warms up he is, despite the circumstances, masterful.  The slaves all clap along...  Some dance along.  All admire his work.  Freeman chief among them.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Keep on.  Keep on.Solomon continues to play.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Hella better than you, Bob.  Hella better.Bob looks bitter as Solomon plays on.EXT. FREEMAN'S/GREAT ROOM - DAYAn odd sort of sight, A JUMBLE OF ACTIVITY.  CUSTOMERS have come to see Freeman's lot - the room all gussied up with flowers.  Freeman moves among them, displaying them as a rancher would prize chattel.   Freeman makes the slaves hold their heads up - "look smart" as he previously admonished them.  They are made to walk briskly back and forth while customers feel their hands and arms and bodies, turn them about and ask what skills they possess.  The Customers routinely make the slaves open their mouths and show their teeth.  At times a man or woman are taken off to the side, stripped and inspected more minutely.Randall is made to run, and jump by a PROSPECTIVE BUYER.Bob, as he's done previously, plays his fiddle.As this occurs, as a BUYER looks over a MALE SLAVE - his back lightly scared - Freeman gives the Buyer the soft sell.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   44.FREEMANToo few strokes is a sign they ain't been broken.  Too many tells yah never will.  This is a well tenderized nigger here.The Buyer is more curious in Randall.BUYERYour price for the boy?  FREEMANYou see how fit he is.  Like ripe fruit.  He will grow into a fine nigger.  Six hundred, and that's fair and final.  I take him outside these gates I can name my price.BUYERWill you accept a note?Eliza is beside herself.  She begs of the Buyer:ELIZAPlease, sir, no.  My baby boy, he's my baby.  Please don't divide my family.  Don't take my boy unless you take myself and my baby as well.FREEMANEliza, quiet!ELIZAYou will have the most faithful slave in me, sir.  The most faithful slave that has ever lived.  There is no way that I will not serve, but I beg that you not take my child.BUYERHow much for the lot?FREEMANThe woman is a value in herself.  The child's a treasure.  Three thousand.The Buyer considers, then demurs.BUYERI'll have the boy alone.ELIZANoooo!  Please, God, no!As the Buyer writes out a note, Freeman pulls the crying Eliza away Randall.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   45.FREEMANI will beat the nonsense from you. BUYERCome on, lad.They start away.  Randall runs back, crying but endeavoring to be strong:RANDALLDon't cry, mama.  I will be a good boy.  Don't cry.  I will keep my head up, and I will look smart.  I will always look smart.Freeman is wholly unmoved.  He tears Randall away, thrusts him to the Buyer who then pulls the crying Randall from the room.RANDALL (CONT'D)Mama...!  Mama!ELIZANooooo!  Noooo!All watch the price of slavery: the destruction of the family.EXT. FREEMAN'S SLAVE PEN - NIGHTWe are back in exterior slave pen of Freeman's estate.  The slaves are bedded down under the night sky.  There is little sleeping going on.  Eliza cries to herself as OTHER SLAVES MOAN LOUDLY AND CONTINUALLY.  SOLOMON AMONG THEM.  It as though a pall has fallen over the group.Eventually at the door to the yard appears Freeman with a lantern in hand.  Bob is at his side.  With no concern for its causation, Freeman is clearly displeased by the racket.FREEMANQuiet!  Sleep, now!  What's the matter with y'all?  Sleep!He looks to Bob.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Make 'em sleep.Bob now wades into the field of slaves.  He shoves and kicks at the offenders, telling them repeatedly:BOBSleep now.  C'mon, go on to sleep.  Yah hear Massa Freeman?  Sleep.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   46.The moaning continues.  Bob's efforts do little.  If anything, the moaning grows louder.  Solomon is insistent:  SOLOMON...We need a doctor...EXT. FREEMAN'S SLAVE PEN - DAYFreeman clearly having no choice but to give in and hire a doctor; DOCTOR CARR looks over Clemens Ray.CLEMENSThe pain in my neck and back is violent.  I'm hot and I cannot stop with my shaking.DOCTOR CARR(to Freeman:)Could be any number of things.  They seem otherwise in good health.  I wouldn't expect it to be anything stronger than a passing fever.Solomon, hearing this, speaks plainly:SOLOMONSmall pox.  On the ship that brought us down one of our number died of the disease.The doctor stares at Solomon for a moment.  Clearly this development isn't a good thing.EXT. STREET - LATERSolomon, Eliza, Clemens Ray, John and a few more sickly slaves are being driven in a wagon by Dr. Carr.EXT. CHARITY HOSPITAL - LATERThe group arrives to CHARITY HOSPITAL which is built just outside of the city.  It is a fairly large, three story structure of white marble.Around the back of the hospital the group sees COFFINS BEING BUILT AND PREPARED BY CARPENTERS.  Dozens and dozens of them.  Not exactly a comforting sight.INT. CHARITY HOSPITAL - LATERThe group, led by Doctor Carr, enters.  Though a hospital, it doesn't really seems a place for healing.  More a place for dying; a place where the sick are brought and kept until they can be delivered to the death 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   47.which waits for them.  As if to underscore this, we CAN HEAR THE MOANS OF PATIENTS drifting through the hallways.INT. HOSPITAL/PATIENTS WARD - LATERIt is a large and not particularly sanitary room filled with row after row of beds.  Nearly all the beds are filled with patients of both sexes and all ages.  In this ward, ALL THE PATIENTS ARE BLACK, and all are suffering from smallpox.  There is very little treatment going on.  Mostly the patients are being made "comfortable," though even that is relative.  With a few WHITE NURSES - but mostly BLACK WARDS - looking on the slaves are stripped of their clothing and given hospital gowns to wear.  As they dress, the group hears THE TOLL OF A BELL.INT. HOSPITAL/PATIENTS WARD - LATERA couple of days have passed.  Solomon lays in bed next to Clemens Ray.  We are at the height of Solomon's illness.  As with Robert, he is a hideous sight.  There are pustules all over is body, and Clemens as well.  Solomon is nearly blind with pain and suffering.  His cries are pitiable, and blend with the continual wail that comes from the room.INT. HOSPITAL/PATIENTS ROOM - LATERSolomon is being given care by a BLACK WARD.  His puss sacks are being drained.  ON OCCASION, IN THE BG, WE HEAR THE SOUND OF THE BELL TOLLING.  Solomon looks over to Clemens who is in a more advanced state.  In some ways it's as though Solomon's looking at future projection of himself.  Is this what's waiting for him?  And under the circumstances would such an end be so bad?  INT. HOSPITAL/PATIENTS ROOM - LATERAgain, days on.  A DOCTOR covers Clemens Ray with a blanket.  Clearly he is dead.  The doctor sends off a WARD.  A few moments later, as the body is being taken away, THE BELL TOLLS.As he lays in bed, Solomon's head lolls to one side.  He looks toward the WINDOW.  The light of the sun flares off the pane.  The glass, poorly made, refracts the sunlight and casts off a slight spectrum of color.  It dances across Solomon's face.  The light in his eyes offering him more pain the solace, but he cannot help but look at it.  As he looks toward the light, as his eyes flutter between life and lifelessness...  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   48.INT. NORTHUP HOUSE - FLASHBACKIt is years prior.  The odyssey that awaits Solomon cannot even begin to even enter his mind.  Solomon is with his family - Anne, Elizabeth, Margaret and Alonzo.  Solomon holds in his hand and up to the light of the window a SMALL, STAINED GLASS MEDALLION.  Nothing too elaborate.  Something a child would, and in fact has, made; a simple, colored flower.  Five pedals surrounding a flower head.  As light passes through the stained glass the colors resemble those of the previous scene.  Though, at this moment, as he marvels at the gift from Elizabeth, there is much joy in his heart.SOLOMONYou made it?  Yourself?ELIZABETHNearly so.ANNEShe had a little help around the fire.  Nothing more.ALONZOIt's rather plain.ANNEHush!  It's beautiful.SOLOMONPrecious.  It is precious.MARGARET May I wear it?ELIZABETHIt's for father!ALONZOI can play the drum.SOLOMONA brief exhibition around Margaret's neck before I reclaim it.As Solomon fastens the medallion around Margaret's neck, Alonzo takes up a small drum and begins to beat it mercilessly as he runs around the room.  Margaret strokes the medallion and smiles.ALONZODo you like my drumming?ANNEI believe we have raised a master of fortissimo.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   49.MARGARETI adore it.  Will you fashion one for me?ANNEFor me as well.ELIZABETHCome, Margaret.  Into the light.Elizabeth beckons Margaret closer to the window, Elizabeth holding up the medallion to the light.  Anne remains close to Solomon as he stares at the light coming from the pendant.OVER THIS WE HEAR an emotional supplication from Solomon:SOLOMON (V.O.)Lord...  Have I not always been faithful?  Did I not put you above all else?  INT. HOSPITAL/PATIENTS ROOM - CONTINUOUSWe have returned from the flashback.  Solomon remains in bed, looking far worse than just previously.  Though his lips move barely if at all, we hear the payer coming from him.SOLOMONDid I not believe my gifts were of your grace and not my creation?  I have always been faithful, Lord.  I ask you reward my devotion.  I beg of you only one thing: I pray you end the suffering.  Death is better than all that waits.  Take me, Lord...  Take my life.  Lord.  ...Lord?  BLACKINT.  HOSPITAL/RECOVERY WARD - LATERWe are in a recovery ward in the hospital.  Really, not much different than the sick ward, other than the fact that these PATIENTS have survived the illness and are going to live.  We see Solomon sitting up in bed.  As with all the other patients, his pustules have abated, but they have left his face and body scarred.  HE WILL REMAIN THIS WAY FOR THE REST OF HIS LIFE.  Yet one more physical reminder of all that he's been through even at this relatively short stage of his enslavement.As he sits, the door of the ward opens.  Eliza is walked in and ushered over to a bed.  She, too, has obviously survived the ordeal.  But also, as with Solomon, she is 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   50.now scared as well.  Along with having lost a child, her illness seems to have had a substantial negative effect on not just her physical health, but Eliza's mental health as well.For a moment Solomon and Eliza just sit among the other recovering patients, waiting for what is to come next.BLACKEXT. FREEMAN'S/GREAT ROOM - DAYWe are back in Freeman's great room.  It is almost as if the intervening never happened.  The slaves are again on display.  Bob, again, playing the fiddle as the BUYERS move among the prospective sales; a jumble of question and conversations which Freeman fields.Among the buys we see WILLIAM FORD; a good-looking man, who has appeared to have reached the middle age of life.  There is something cheerful and attractive in his face and tone of voice.FORDWhat is the price for the ones Harry, Platt and Eliza?FREEMANNine Hundred for Harry, a thousand for Platt; he is a nigger of talent.  Seven hundred for Eliza.  My fairest price, sir.FORDYou will exchange a note?FREEMANAs always, from you, Mr. Ford.Eliza, pulling Emily forward and putting her on urgent display:ELIZASir...  Sir, she is my baby.Stepping in, attempting to explain things.SOLOMONSir, she watched as her only boy was sold off.  If there is any way in your heart--  FREEMANYou will be quiet.SOLOMONTo not separate them further, sir.  The Lord almost took her with 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   51.
(MORE)disease.  If He would not separate Mother and Child, are any of us to do more?FORDWhat is her price?FREEMAN(spitefully)I won't sell the girl. FORDAnd you have no need for her.  One so young will bring you no profit.FREEMANTheys heaps 'n piles of money to be made of her.  She is a beauty.  One of the regular bloods, none of your thick-lipped, bullet heated, cotton picking niggers.  FORDHer child, man.  For God's sake, are you not sentimental in the least?FREEMANMy sentimentality stretches to the length of a coin.  Do you want the lot, Mr. Ford, or do you pass on 'em all?FORDI will take them.Eliza grips Emily tight.ELIZAI will not go without her.  You will not take her from me.AS if to prove her wrong, Freeman puts a foot to Eliza and harshly kicks her away from Eliza.ELIZA (CONT'D)Please, don't.  No!Freeman, to Bob:FREEMANTake her out of here.Bob begins to pull Eliza away toward the door of the room, but her screaming and pleading do not abate.  IT IS CLEARLY UNSETTLING TO THE OTHER BUYERS.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Keep her quiet.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   52.SOLOMON (CONT'D)Bob tries to muzzle her with his hand, but Eliza continues to scream for her child as Emily does for her mother.EMILYDon't leave, mama.  Mama, don't leave me!FREEMAN(to Solomon)Play something!  Get the fiddle and play.As ordered, Solomon takes up Bob's fiddle and begins to play lightly.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Play!Solomon begins to play harder and louder.  Still, it is barely enough to drown out Eliza's cries.  Freeman gets the other slaves to clap along with Solomon's playing.FREEMAN (CONT'D)Goddamn it, Bob, yah keep her quiet or it's yer damned hide I will take it out of!Bob pulls a rag, stuffs it in Eliza's mouth.  Clamping both hands over her mouth, he hauls Eliza from the room by the head.  It is an ugly, ugly scene.EXT. FORD PLANTATION  - LATERDriven in a horse drawn wagon by Ford is the group of Solomon, John and Eliza.  Eliza is sullen to say the least.  With the loss of her two children she has dropped into a depression she will not be able to pull out of.They arrive to the FORD PLANTATION.  The main house of the plantation - the GREAT HOUSE as they are commonly called - is sizable.  Two stories high with a piazza in front.  In the rear are also a log kitchen, poultry house, croncribs and several slave cabins.  The plantation is described as "a green spot in the wilderness."With the arrival of Master Ford there is a flurry of activity - the "excitement" of a new delivery - as a "yellow girl," ROSE announces his return.  Present with Rose is her husband, a slave named WALTON.  Rose calls to her Mistress - MISTRESS FORD.ROSEMistress!  Mistress, they arrivn'.Mistress Ford EXITS the house and travels to her husband, kisses him, then laughingly inquires:12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   53.MRS. FORDDid you bring those niggers?  Three of them?  You got three?(calling off:)Sally...!FORDMake me something to eat, dear.  The day has taken it from me.MRS. FORDRose, fetch Sally.ROSEYes, ma'am.MRS. FORDTell her there are three new niggers.ROSEYes, ma'am.  (calling off)Sally...!MRS. FORDDo not yell for her.  Run fetch her.Rose runs off to fetch Sally.  Mrs. Ford turns her attention to the new arrivals.MRS. FORD (CONT'D)Let me get a look at them...  Do they have any skills?  What do they do?Indicating to Solomon and John:FORDWalton, tomorrow you will take these two up to the mill and start them workin'.WALTONYeh, suh.MRS. FORD(re: Eliza)This one's cryin'.  Why is this one cryin'?FORDSeparated from her child.MRS. FORDOh, dear.FORDIt couldn't be helped.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   54.Moving with alacrity, Rose returns with SALLY; another female slave.SALLYSuh...?FORDSally, take these new niggers around to your cabin.  Fix them a meal, and have them rest themselves.SALLYYeh, suh, Massa Ford.(to the slaves:)C'mon, now.  C'mon.  Don't dawdle.EXT. FORD PLANTATION/SALLY'S CABIN - MOMENTS LATERThe group rounds the house to Sally's cabin.  There are TWO YOUNG CHILDREN - naked, having been in the middle of getting washed - playing in the grass.  As the group arrives, the kids jump up and toddle toward them, look at them "as though they were a brace of rabbits," then run off.INT. FORD PLANTATION/SALLY'S CABIN - CONTINUOUSSally conducts the group into her cabin.  As they enter, Sally instructs:SALLYLay down your bundles.  Seat yourselves.  Rest while yah can.  Tomorrow'll be work.  Ya'll work everyday 'cept fer the Sabbath.  Still, it's up in the mornin'.  Massa Ford read us the scripture 'fo we's left ta ourselves.Just then JOHN, a young slave of about sixteen years of age comes RUNNING IN.  He looks steadily in the faces of the newly arrived slaves, then turns and runs back out without saying a word.  He does however LAUGH LOUDLY as if their arrival was a great joke.EXT. WOODS - DAYWe are in a wooded area.  There is A GANG OF SLAVES chopping trees into timber.  It is hard, laborious work made no more easy by the sweltering heat.  Solomon and John are chief among them, but also present are two slaves in particular; SAM and HARRY as well as Walton who's basically in charge of the group.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   55.EXT. WOODS - LATERThe slaves now load the timber onto a horse drawn wagon.  Again, hard work done under the ever present sun.EXT. ROAD - LATERAs Walton drives the wagon, the other slaves trudge along side by foot.  We should get the sense the travel is long and tedious. EXT. FORD'S MILL - LATERIt is a sizable mill on the edge of Indian Creek.  There is much work being done, the slaves primarily employed in piling the timber and chopping it into lumber.  As before, there is little doubt about the rigors of the job at hand.At the mill the slaves are overseen by ADAM TAYDEM.  Working as a carpenter at the mill is JOHN TIBEATS.  There are also various CUSTOMERS who move about placing orders. EXT. FORD PLANTATION - DAYIt's Sunday morning.  All of Ford's slaves are dressed with their "finest" clothes - brightly colored and as free as possible of defect.  The slaves are gathered on the lawn just beyond the piazza.  Mistress Ford is present as well.  As the slaves listen, Ford reads to them Scripture.  His tone is of a man trying to preach by way of compassion.FORD"But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.  God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.  And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine. But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence, they were gathered together.  Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying,  Master, which is the great commandment in the law?  Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,  and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment.  And 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   56.
(MORE)the second is like unto it, thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.  On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets."Despite the lightness with which Ford speaks and the hope in his words, Eliza sits off to the side - self-secluded a bit - weeping gently.  We should be able to see in Mistress Ford's eyes that Eliza's constant crying is unsettling.EXT. WOODS - DAYAgain we see Walton's gang of slaves working in the woods, turning the trees into timber.  As before, it is hot and hard work.EXT. ROAD - LATERAnd once again we see the slaves make the tedious trek from the woods to the mill.EXT. FORD'S MILL - DAYThe slaves now work at unloading the timber.  Though they work hard, it is not nearly hard enough for Taydem.TAYDEMMove.  Move damn it.  Yah wastin' daylight.FORDMind your tone, Adam.TAYDEM...Suh...EXT. FORD PLANTATION/SALLY'S CABIN - NIGHTSolomon is grinding corn along with Sally.  Sally's two children are present.  Rose knits Emily's hair.  From time to time, Solomon pops little bits of corn toward the children and they attempt to catch it in their mouths.  When they do, they squeal with delight.As the children laugh, a still clearly heartbroken Eliza says wistfully:ELIZAI think Emily had a very good day today.  Very happy.  I know Randall is well; a stout boy.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   57.FORD (CONT'D)She begins to weep.  Thoughts of her children too heavy to bear.  Giving her warning:SALLYYah need to stop wit yer carryin; on.  Yah jus' upset the Mistress.  Yer chilr'n gone.  Ain't no otherwise.  And ain't nuthin' ta do but 'cept it.Sally's frankness does nothing to easy Eliza's crying.EXT. FORD'S MILL - DAYThe slaves have broken for lunch.  They snack on smoked meat and drink water from gourds.  As they lunch Solomon reads from Sam's Bible to the other slaves.SOLOMONBut ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve.  For whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he that serveth?  Is not he that sitteth at meat?  But I am among you as he that serveth.A WHITE CUSTOMER, irate at the sight and sound of slaves reading Scripture, crosses over.  He grabs the Bible.WHITE CUSTOMERFrom where did you steal this?SAMSuh, the book is my property.The White Customer has no interest in Sam's answer.  With flailing hands he STARTS BEATING ON SAM.  Solomon tries to stop him.  That only makes the situation worse, Solomon now the target of the man's ire.WHITE CUSTOMERTake your filthy hands from me!Ford comes running over.FORDWhat is the commotion?WHITE CUSTOMERYour niggers are either brazen or rebellious.  This one was readin' aloud.  Scripture, no less.  This one claims it to be his.FORDIt is.  A gift from his Mistress.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   58.WHITE CUSTOMERYou condone this?FORDI encourage it.  As a Christian I can do no less.WHITE CUSTOMERAny man who would allow his slaves to have a Bible is not fit to own a nigger.  And any man who would allow a slave to read is dangerous.The Customer huffs off.  Handing the book back to Sam, very matter of fact:FORDPay him no mind.  There will always be men who don't understand the nature of God, nor His compassion.  But the word of God applies to all, whites and niggers alike.  In that you may take comfort.EXT. FORD PLANTATION - DAYEliza is being ridden off in a cart driven by Tibeats.  Watching her depart are Master and Mistress Ford, Rose, Sally, Walton and Solomon.Ford heads back into the house without a word.  The Mistress turns to the other slaves and states plainly:MRS. FORDIt's for the best.  She weeps constantly, more occupied in broodin' over her sorrows than in attendin' to her business.  I cannot have that kind of depression about.  ...It's for the best.EXT. WOODS - DAYAgain, we see the gang of slaves working hard at cutting down the wood.EXT. ROAD - DAYWalton is at the reigns of the wagon carrying the timber to Ford's mill.  Slaves trudge alongside, same as it ever was.  Only...it's not quite the same.  Walton brings the wagon to a halt.  He, and the slaves look up the road ahead of them.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   59.Standing in the middle of the road is a group of CHICKASAWS INDIANS.  They are in their "usual" dress of buckskin breeches and calico hunting shirts of fantastic colors, buttoned from belt to chin.  They have with them DOGS and HORSES.  They carry with them the carcass of a deer.The two groups stare at each other for a long moment.EXT. FIELD - LATERThe groups of slaves and Chickasaws are now intermingled.  They "break bread" - actually they work on the carcass of the deer which is now roasting over a large fire.  As well the group share a smoke on a pipe.  One of the Chickasaws is playing a tune on an "INDIAN FIDDLE."  The Chickasaws perform a customary dance; trotting after each other, and giving utterance to a guttural, sing-song noise.The slaves enjoy the respite from work, Solomon particularly taken by the music...if not entirely enthralled by it. After a bit, Solomon rights himself and heads from the group.EXT. RIVER BANK - CONTINUOUSSolomon arrives to some tall grass at the edge of the river.  Lowering his trousers, SOLOMON SQUATS TO DEFECATE.  As he does, he stares out toward the flowing waters of Indian Creek.  After a few moments, as though a thought far greater than relieving himself has come to him, Solomon stands and replaces his pants.  He goes out to the water.  Taking a reed he throws it into the creek and watches it float upstream.Then, as though he were a man possessed, Solomon wades out into the water.  Stands in the heart of it as it flows around him.EXT. FORD'S MILL - DAYJust beyond the mill Solomon speaks with Ford as Taydem listens.  Solomon is drawing in the dirt, making rough diagrams for Ford as he explains himself.SOLOMONThe creek is plenty deep enough to sail, even with a boat full of load.  The distance from the mill to the point on the latter bayou is several miles by water fewer than land.  It occurs to me that 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   60.
(MORE)the expense of the transportation would be materially diminished--TAYDEM"Materially diminished?"  SOLOMONIf we use the waterway.TAYDEMIt's a scheme, Ford.  Visionary, but a scheme.  Plenty of engineers have schemed similarly.  The passes are too narrow.SOLOMONI reckon them at more than twelve feet at their most narrow.  Wide enough for a tub to traverse.  Appears narrower to the eye; mostly obstructed by tree trunks.  A team of niggers can clear it out.TAYDEMAnd you know what of transport and terra formin'?SOLOMONI labored repairing the Champlain canal, on the section over which William Van Nortwick was superintendent.  With my earnings I hired several efficient hands to assist me, and I entered into contracts for the transportation of large rafts of timber from Lake Champlain to Troy.  During the season I became perfectly familiar with the art and mysteries of rafting.FORD(drily witty)Pity his qualifications exceed the work at hand...  But I supposes it's worthy of a try.TAYDEMA waste of effort.FORDIt's Platt's effort to waste. (to Solomon)Get a team.  Let's see what you can do.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   61.SOLOMON (CONT'D)EXT. CREEK - DAYWE HAVE A SERIES OF SCENES in which we see Solomon and a TEAM OF BLACKS working on the creek:  CHOPPING TREES ALONG THE BANKS, widening out the shore...  It's all just a trial for now.  The work is diligent, but it is basic to this point.  Still, under Solomon's direction, the slaves go at it like they've got something to prove.  And rightly they do.Solomon also works on a narrow raft of twelve cribs with which he will transport the timber.Once this is constructed, HE PERSONALLY "SAILS" THEM UP THE CREEK WITH A TEST LOAD.EXT. FORD'S MILL - LATERFord and a group of slaves wait along the river banks just beyond the mill.  All are expectant in their manner.  A long moment passes with no sign of Solomon.  Then, from up river, we see Solomon's raft of lumber winding its way.  SLAVES CHEER, and Ford literally applauds the effort.   Taydem looks pissed.  He has just been shown up after all.  TIBEATS IS THERE AS WELL.  HE SHARES TAYDEM'S BITTERNESS.INT. FORD PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - DAYAs we come into the scene, Ford is presenting Solomon with a fiddle.  Not as grand as the one he previously owned in New York, but a fine instrument none the less.  It is a gift of thanks for his hard work.  Solomon's gratitude is easily expressed.SOLOMONMy great thanks, Master Ford.FORDMy thanks to you, and it is the least of it.  My hope is that it brings us both much joy over the years.Following the statement, Solomon's not sure how to react.  He remains grateful, but the thought of "over the years" is just a reminder of the altered state in which he now finds himself.EXT. FORD PLANTATION - DAYIt's Sunday.  The slaves are again gathered to hear the word of the Lord as read by Master Ford.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   62.FORDAt the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?  And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.  Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.  And whoso shall receive one such little child in my name receiveth me.  But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.  Woe unto the world because of offences!  For it must needs be that offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!BLACKEXT. FORD PLANTATION - DAYSeasons have passed.  It is winter now, and very grey out along the bayou.  Ford and Tibeats - who we have seen working around the mill - stand with Solomon, Tibeats giving Solomon an inspection.  Ford carries much lament.FORDHe's a good carpenter and a smart nigger.  TIBEATSI'm familiar with his cleverness.  Turn around.  Raise yer shirt.Solomon does as instructed.  Tibeats looks at Solomon's  back, at the scars from lashings he bears.TIBEATS (CONT'D)Troublesome.FORDQuite the opposite.  Trustworthy to the highest degree.  A jack-of-all trades.  No chore too menial nor skill too complicated.  Plays the fiddle as well.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   63.TIBEATSLook like he got airs.FORDYou won't find a nigger more humble.TIBEATSAin't found a nigger yet I cain't humble.Tibeats heads off.  Solomon, highly curious over the preceding.  WHEN FORD RESPONDS, IT IS WITH GREAT HUMILIATION.SOLOMONSir, did I do something wrong?FORDNot your concern, Platt.  I say with much...shame I have compiled debts.  I have long preached austerity, but find myself hypocritical in that regard.  You'll be in the ownership of Mr. Tibeats.  You are his now.  But he himself is in the employ of my sister and her husband, their plantation is across the Bayou from my own.  There is much building to be done, and you'll be of great use to them.  Serve him as you'd serve me.SOLOMONYes, sir.FORDAnd your faithfulness will not be forgotten.  If I can ever be of aid, you need but send word.SOLOMONYes, sir.FORDPride and want have been my sin.  Loss of you is but one of my punishments.EXT. ROAD - DAYIn a wagon driven by Tibeats, Solomon rides along with Sam and Harry.  They travel up Bayou Boeuf.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   64.EXT. TANNER PLANATION - LATERThe Solomon arrives on wagon with Tibeats to the Tanner Plantation.  As the wagon comes to a stop, Tibeats orders the slaves:TIBEATSGather up your wares, but don't wander about until I make space for you.Tibeats retreats to do just that.  He converses with CHAPIN who is the overseer on the plantation.As he waits, Solomon sees a figure in the near distances pulling up dead plants from the yard.  The person is just far enough away Solomon can't clearly make out who it is.  Recognition gradually comes to him.  He yells to the person.SOLOMONEliza...The figure looks up.  It is Eliza.  She makes the LONG TRAVEL over to Solomon, moving slowly at a somnambulistic pace.  As she nears, Solomon can see that Eliza looks weary and gaunt.  She has grown feeble and emaciated, and is still in mourning for her children.  There is no awareness in her eyes.    SOLOMON (CONT'D)It's Platt.  It's Platt, Eliza.A moment before Eliza, her faculties clearly slipping, recognizes Solomon.  A bit, just a bit, of life and light return to her.ELIZAPlatt...?  You knew my babies.SOLOMONI did.ELIZADo you recollect how handsome little Emily was?  And Randall...  Do you recall how he loved me more than anything?SOLOMONHe did.ELIZAI wonder if they are still living.  I think they are still alive.  A child would perish without their mother, a lesser child.  But mine are too hearty.  Would you say so?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   65.SOLOMON...I would...ELIZAYou've seen what strong constitutions they have.SOLOMONAs vital and healthy as any children I've ever seen.  They endure, and they would want the same of their mother.  They would want her to--ELIZAWhere are they?  You say they endure, you say that they--SOLOMONEliza--ELIZAThen where are my children?Having returned, Tibeats calls to Solomon.  His displeasure in having to do such obvious in his tone:TIBEATSPlatt!SOLOMONI must go.Solomon turns to head away.  Eliza grabs him by the arm, and holds him fast as she becomes a bit crazed.ELIZAYou know where they are.  Where?SOLOMONEliza, unhand me.TIBEATSDamn it, Platt!Tibeats moves toward Solomon and Eliza.  His fist is curled to do work.ELIZAYou know, tell me.  Tell me where they are!Arriving to the pair, Tibeats wastes no time in throwing a quick but severe beating on Eliza.  Done with that, he strikes Solomon hard across the face.  Chapin intervenes.CHAPINTibeats.  Enough.  Your meaning is clear.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   66.TIBEATSSweat, or stripes, nigger.  You will bear sweat or you will wear stripes.INT. TANNER PLANATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTSolomon talks with another of Tanner's slaves, LAWSON, and his wife BRISTOL.  They dine on bacon and corn cake.  Eliza, all the while and same as always, is continually and gently weeping.Bristol warns Solomon regarding Tibeats.BRISTOLTibeats has got a streak to him.  Cain't say where it come from;.  Drinks no mo' than most, take to da Bible...  That don't matter none to his disposition, and he don't give no warnin' for his moods neither.  LAWSONSay this; massa hate a nigger that think for hisself.  Do as told - yes, suh.  No, suh - you'll do fine.  BRISTOLBut you show a spark of reasonin' behind yo eyes...steel yourself for a lashin'.  SOLOMONFord wouldn't stand for him to give me such a beating.BRISTOLNot Massa Ford's no more.  Yo time with him is o'er and done.  And the Tanner's hain't never about.  Put it out your head.  Learn yourself ta be a proper nigger.BLACKEXT. TANNER PLANATION - DAYWe see Solomon working as a carpenter.  He is working to help erect a Weaving House that stands off to the side of the plantation's Great House.At the moment Solomon is nailing on siding.  Tibeats comes around and is immediately dissatisfied with this work.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   67.TIBEATSMake them boards flush.SOLOMONThey are, sir.TIBEATSThey is no such thing.Solomon runs his hands over the boards.SOLOMONAs smooth to the touch as a yearling's coat.TIBEATSCallin' me a liar, boy?Not caring for Solomon's tone, Epps's about ready to physically correct him.  But Solomon verbally dodges.SOLOMONOnly a matter of perspective, sir.  From where you stand you may see differently.  But the hands are not mistaken.  I ask only that you employ all your senses before rendering judgement.What's Tibeats to do when faced with fact?  All he can do is spew invectives.TIBEATSYou are a brute.  You are a dog, and no better for followin' instruction.SOLOMONI'll do as ordered, sir.TIBEATSThen you'll be up at daybreak.  You will procure a keg of nails from Chapin and commence puttin' on clapboards.  Tibeats wheels away.EXT. TANNER PLANATION/SLAVE SHACK - EVENINGThe slaves eat.  All tired from a days work they conduct themselves in silence.  All except for Eliza who as always weeps.  The sound of her sobbing edging him up, Solomon finally snaps:SOLOMONEliza.  Eliza, stop!  He goes to her, grabs her.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   68.SOLOMON (CONT'D)Stop your wailing.  Your sorrow will be the end of you.She does not stop.  As if to force the misery from her, Solomon strikes Eliza twice.SOLOMON (CONT'D)Stop it!  Stop!Eliza does stop crying.  But only just long enough to enquire:ELIZAHave you stopped crying for your children?  You make no outward sounds, but inside you; do you still weep and wail?  Before you drift at night, do you not wonder where they are and if they prosper...Solomon?  If you do not, then you assuredly have been reduced to the nigger they are desirous of...Solomon.This truth - AND THE USE OF HIS TRUE NAME BY PATSEY - strikes Solomon very directly.  They may mourn differently, but he has not let go of his children. EXT. TANNER PLANATION - DAYBREAKIt is early, early morning.  The sun just barely making its way over the horizon.  Solomon is waiting on the piazza for Chapin to arrive.  He does, and in good spirits.CHAPINPlatt...?  Good early morning.Solomon removes his hat as he addresses Chapin.SOLOMONSir, Master Tibeats had directed me to call upon you for a keg of nails.EXT. STORE HOUSE - MOMENTS LATERChapin is rolling out a a keg of nails for Solomon.CHAPINIf Tibeats prefers a different size, I will endeavor to furnish them, but you may use those until further directed.Chapin mounts a nearby horse.  As he rides off into the field where slaves are already at work:12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   69.CHAPIN (CONT'D)Good morning to you, Platt.Left alone, Solomon shoulders the keg and begins to carry it off.EXT. WEAVING HOUSE - LATERIN A SERIES OF CUTS, we see Solomon breaking the head on the keg, and begin going to work nailing the clapboards onto the house.  He is as diligent as ever.EXT. WEAVING HOUSE - LATERAs the day gets on to mid-morning, the sun already baking in the sky, Tibeats makes his way over to Solomon.  Before even arriving to Solomon, his mein is one of belligerence; out of sorts and something less than sober.TIBEATSI thought I told yah to commence puttin' on clapboards this morn'.SOLOMONYes, master.  I am about it.  I have begun on the other side of the house.Tibeats walks around to look over Solomon's work.  He is picayune, as if purposefully looking for fault.TIBEATSDidn't I tell yah last night to get a keg of nails of Chapin?SOLOMONYes, master, and so I did; and Chapin said he would get another size for you, if you wanted them when he came back from the field.Tibeats walks to the keg and kicks it.  Moving toward Solomon "with a great passion:"TIBEATSGoddamn yah!  I thought yah knowed something!Solomon, perhaps inspired by his moment with Eliza, is in no mood for Chapin.SOLOMONI did as instructed.  If there's something wrong, then its wrong with your instructions.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   70.TIBEATSYah black bastard!  Yah goddman black bastard!In an inconsolable rage, Tibeats runs off to the piazza to fetch a whip.  Solomon looks around.  He is alone other than RACHEL the cook and CHAPIN'S WIFE who, shocked by that which she witnesses, runs out to the field to fetch Chapin.  Solomon's instinct is to run, but he stands his ground as Tibeats marches back whip in hand.TIBEATS (CONT'D)Strip yer clothes!  Solomon does no such thing.TIBEATS (CONT'D)Strip!SOLOMONI will not.With "concentrated vengeance," Tibeats springs for Solomon, seizing him by the throat with one hand and raising the whip with the other.  Before he can strike the blow, however, Solomon catches Tibeats by the collar of his coat and pulls him in close.  Reaching down, Solomon grabs Tibeats by the ankle and pushes him back  with the other hand.  Tibeats tumbles to the ground.  A violent struggle takes place as Solomon puts a foot to Tibeats throat, and then in a frenzy of madness snatches the whip from Tibeats and begins to strike him with the handle again and again and again.TIBEATSYew will not live ta see another day nigger!  This is yer last, I swear it!Solomon ignores the threats, continues to beat Tibeats.  Blow after blow falling fast and heavy on Tibeats's wriggling form.  The stiff stock of the whip wraps around Tibeats's cringing body until Solomon's arm aches.  Tibeats's cries of vengeance turn to yelps for help and then pleas for mercy:TIBEATS (CONT'D)Murder!  It's murder!  Lord, God, help me.  God be merciful!Chapin comes riding in from the field fast and hard.  Solomon strikes Tibeats a blow or two more, then delivers a well-directed kick that sends Tibeats rolling over the ground.CHAPINWhat is the matter?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   71.Tibeats struggles up and tries to present an air of dignity and control while he keeps a demonic eye on Solomon:SOLOMONMaster Tibeats wants to whip me for using the nails you gave me.CHAPINWhat's the matter with the nails?TIBEATSThey're...they're too large.CHAPINI am overseer here.  I told Platt to take them and use them, and if they were not of the proper size I would get others on returning from the field.  It is not his fault.  Besides, I shall furnish such nails as I please.  Do you understand that, Mr. Tibeats?Tibeats answer is in the grinding of his teeth and the shaking of his fist.TIBEATSThis ain't half over.  I will have my satisfaction.Tibeats moves off toward the house.  Chapin follows.  A long moment, Solomon stands alone.  He looks around, not sure what to do; to stay or to flee.  Anxiety mounts on his features.  A moment more, and Tibeats exits the house.  He saddles his horse and rides off to beat the devil.  Or, worse, to fetch him.Chapin comes running back out of the house.  He is visibly excited, and when he speaks he is quite earnest.  Though he tries to project reasoned emotions he gives off an air of impending trouble.CHAPINDo not stir.  Do not attempt to leave the plantation on any account whatever.  Your master is a rascal, and has left on no good errand.  But if you run there is no protecting you.SOLOMONSir--CHAPINIf you run, Platt, there is no protecting you.  Rachel...!12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   72.Chapin runs off to join Rachel.  The two converse at a distance from Solomon, then they head off for the log kitchen.Solomon is now very much alone, and he waits for what is to come.  AND WE WAIT WITH HIM.  And we wait, and we continue to wait...  Moment by moment, the dread of the unexpected mount.Solomon's eyes begin to well.  He has beaten a white man, and he knows that death awaits him.A SLIGHT PAYER TO THE HEAVENS BEGINS TO FORM IN HIS THROAT, but he is too choked up to fully speak it.Chapin has now returned to the piazza.  He stands and watches, but does not move to Solomon.Solomon waits, and waits...WE HEAR THE SOUND OF DISTANT HOOFS which grow louder and louder in the manner of rolling thunder.  It's Tibeats.  He returns with two accomplices; COOK and RAMSAY.  They carry with them large whips and a coil of rope.Dismounting, they move with menace that is tinged with perverse pleasure.  Tibeats orders:TIBEATSCross your hands.SOLOMONThere is no need.TIBEATSYou resist, I swear I will break your head and cut your black throat.  Cross your hands!Solomon does as ordered.  He's tied by Cook and Ramsay - his wrists, and then ankles bound in the same manner.  In the meantime the other two have slipped a cord within Solomon's elbows, running it across his back and tying it firmly.  Solomon is then dragged toward a peach tree.  A lynching is in store.  The naked horror of it intensely palpable.  Solomon looks toward the piazza, but Chapin is now gone.  Tears of fear flow down Solomon's cheeks.  He is on the verge of panic; a man heading toward his own execution, he begins to struggle and fight.  Cook and Ramsay almost relish this; an opportunity to inflict hurt on Solomon.A rope goes around Solomon's neck, then is tossed over the branch of the tree.  The trio begin to hoist Solomon.  He gasps and gags as spittle flies from his mouth and the life is choked from him.With suddenness, Chapin comes from the house brandishing a pistol in each hand - Colt Paterson .36 caliber 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   73."Holster" pistols with 9" barrels.  Chapin moves with determination toward the lynch mob.  He is sharp and matter of fact.  With the guns in hand, he really doesn't need to be much more demonstrative.CHAPINGentlemen...  Whoever moves that slave another foot from where he stands is a dead man.  Tibeats, you are a scoundrel, and I know it.  You richly deserved the flogging you have received.  I have been overseer of this plantation seven years, and in the absence of William Ford, am master here.  My duty is to protect his interests.  Ford holds a mortgage on Platt of four hundred dollars.  If you hang him, he loses his debt.  Until that is canceled you have no right to take his life.Directing his attention to Cook and Ramsay:CHAPIN (CONT'D)As for you two, begone.  If you have any regard for your own safety...I say, begone!Cook and Ramsay don't need to be told twice.  The pistols Chapin's gripping make the situation real clear.  Without further word, they mount their horses and ride away.Tibeats remains, and his anger with him.TIBEATSYah got no cause.  Platt is mine, and mine ta do with as I please.  Yah touch my property, I will 'ave yah strung up as well. Tibeats mounts up and departs.  There is a surreal moment as Chapin's not sure what to do about Solomon.  He chooses to do nothing.  Solomon is left dangling by the neck from the tree as Chapin calls to Rachel:CHAPINRun to the field.  Fetch Lawson, hurry him here and bring the brown mule with him.Rachel runs off.  A FEW MOMENTS, then LAWSON comes running with the mule.  Chapin, with much urgency:CHAPIN (CONT'D)You must ride to Master Ford.  Tell him to come here at once without a single moment's delay.  Tell him they are trying to murder Platt.  Hurry, boy.  Bring him 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   74.
(MORE)back if you must kill the mule to do so!Lawson mounts up and rides off, the mule demonstrating much speed.EXT. TANNER PLANATION - LATERHOURS HAVE PASSED.  The sun is now at its apex.  Solomon remains tied and dangling exactly where he was left.  Despite this odd and horrific sight, life on the plantation continues.  The OTHER SLAVES work in the field.  CHILDREN make their way playfully in the yard.  It should all underscore the fact that a black, hanging even partially from a tree, is nothing unusual in this time and space.Chapin walks back and forth with the pistols in his hands.  Clearly he fears Tibeats returning with more and better assistance.  And yet, he does nothing to alleviate Solomon's suffering.  He heeds Tibeats words, and as though caught up in the middle of nothing more than a property dispute, he offers no further aid.EXT. TANNER PLANATION - LATERSolomon continues to hang.  By now he is drenched in sweat, and nearly delirious with dehydration.  His lips dry and parched.  He may not die from hanging, but he may very well expire before the day is over.  Eventually Rachel comes over - timidly, and as though she were acting contrary to orders - and offers a drink of water from a tin cup, pouring it in Solomon's mouth for him.  She then takes a small hand towel and dabs at the water which clings to his lips.She then retreats, and leaves Solomon to hang.EXT. TANNER PLANATION - EVENINGThe sun is just now arching for the horizon.  Solomon remains, as though his torture will not end.  Ford, trailed by the slave Lawson, finally comes riding up.  He dismounts, and moves swiftly over to Solomon.  With great heartache:FORDPlatt...  My poor Platt.Ford produces a blade and cuts Solomon loose.  Solomon attempts to carry himself, but he cannot.  He falls to the ground and passes out.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   75.CHAPIN (CONT'D)INT. TANNER PLANATION/GREAT HOUSE - NIGHTAs we come into the scene, Solomon lays on a blanket on the floor.  Eventually, his eyes flutter, then open.  He is in the foyer of the Tanner house.  As he gets his bearings, he looks around the interior.  THE SPACE IS HANDSOME, AND WELL DECORATED.  It is sharp contrast to the bleak surroundings, shacks and dungeons Solomon has largely been accustom to during his time of slavery.  It will be the "first and last time such a sumptuous resting place was granted" during his twelve years of bondage.  Solomon doesn't have much chance to luxuriate in his surroundings.  He hears a DOG BARKING just outside, and is unnerved.  Has Tibeats returned to finish what he started?  From a study, Master Ford appears with a gun in hand.  He goes to the door, opens it and looks outside.  He can see nothing.  Satisfied, Ford crosses back over to Solomon.  He is frank with Solomon regarding the situation.FORDI believe Tibeats is skulkin' about the premises somewhere, too cowardly to show himself for a proper confrontation.  He will in time.  Tibeats wants you dead, and he will attempt to have you so.  It's no longer safe for you here.  SOLOMONMaster Ford, I am willing to work.  I will proceed with all my labors and more, but I beg that you take me from this hateful place.FORDI cannot protect you. SOLOMONMaster, please...FORDAnd I don't believe you will remain passive if Tibeats attacks.  To strike him again is to warrant your death from all corners.  It is best for you to go.  I have transferred my debt to Edwin Epps.  He will take charge of you.  He is a hard man.  Prides himself on being a "nigger breaker."  But truthfully I could find no others who would have you.  You've made a reputation of yourself.  A notorious one as a slave of both mind and will.  You are an exceptional nigger, Platt.  I fear no good will come of it.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   76.BLACKINT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/BARN - DAYEDWIN EPPS is a large, portly, heavy-bodied man with light hair, high cheek bones and a Roman nose of extraordinary dimensions.  He has blue eyes, a fair complexion and is full six feet high.  His manners are repulsive and coarse, and his language gives speedy and unequivocal evidence that he has never enjoyed the advantages of an education.  He reads the Bible to his slaves, eight of them altogether.  ABRAM; a tall, older slave of about sixty years.  WILEY, who is forty eight.  PHEBE, who is married to Wiley.  BOB and HENRY who are Phebe's children, EDWARD and PATSEY.  Patsey is young, just 23 years old...though in the era, 23 not as young as in the present day.  She is the offspring of a "Guinea nigger," brought over to Cuba in a slave ship.  She nearly brims with unconversant sexuality.MISTRESS EPPS, Epps's wife, is also present.Though Epps reads the word of the Lord, he lacks the tone of compassion with which Ford read.EPPS"And that servant which knew his Lord's will...WHICH KNEW HIS  LORD'S WILL and prepared not himself...PREPARED NOT HIMSELF, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes..."  D'ye hear that?  "Stripes."  That nigger that don't take care, that don't obey his lord - that's his master - d'ye see? - that 'ere nigger shall be beaten with many stripes.  Now, "many" signifies a great many.  Forty, a hundred, a hundred and fifty lashes...  That's Scripter!EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE CABIN - MORNINGThe cabin is constructed of logs, without floor or window.  The rude door hangs on great wooden hinges.  In one end is constructed an awkward fireplace.  The sun has not yet even broken the horizon as a HORN IS BLOWN from the Great House.  Slaves rise, clearly weary from their "joyful" night of dancing.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - DAYIt is August, "cotton picking" season.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   77.We are looking out over a cotton field in full bloom.  It presents a visual purity, like an immaculate expanse of light, new-fallen snow.  The cotton grows from five to seven feet high, each stalk having a great many branches shooting out in all directions and lapping each other above the water furrow.There is a slave to each side of the row.  They have a sack around their necks that hangs to the ground, the mouth of the sack about breast high.  Baskets are placed at the end of the furrows.  Slaves dump their sacks of cotton in the baskets, then pick until their sacks are again filled.Solomon, as with the other slaves, is picking cotton.  It is hard, harsh back breaking work.  Clearly he's not "skilled" at the chore - he moves along slowly and does not pick with any particular dexterity.Patsey, on the other hand, is the "queen of the field."  She moves through the rows at speed, expertly picking the cotton.THE SOUNDTRACK TO THE SCENE IS NOTHING MORE THAN THE RUSTLE OF LABOR, THE MALE CICADAS BUGS "TYMBALS" IN THE HEAT and a SPIRITUAL SUNG BY THE SLAVES.Despite the heat, there is no stopping for water.  The slaves are "driven" by Edward, who is himself "driven" by Treach.TREACHC'mon.  Drive dem niggers.Edward moves among the slaves, applying the whip to them without regard.EDWARDPick dat cotton.  Move along now, hear?EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GIN HOUSE - EVENINGThe day's work is done.  The slaves are now assembled in the gin house with their baskets of cotton which are being weighed by Treach.  There is anxiety among the slave, the reason for which soon becomes apparent. TREACHTwo hundred forty pounds for Bob.EPPSWhat yah got for James?TREACHTwo hundred ninety five pounds.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   78.EPPSTha's real good, boy.  Tha's real good.TREACHOne hundred eighty two pounds for Platt.Epps does not look happy.  Treach says again:TREACH (CONT'D)One hundred eighty two.EPPSHow much can even an average nigger pick a day?TREACHTwo hundred pounds.EPPSThis nigger ain't even average.Epps pulls Solomon aside.TREACHFive hundred twelve pounds for Patsey.  EPPSFive hundred twelve.  Yah men folk got no shame lettin' Patsey out pick yah?  The day ain't yet come she swung lower than five hundred pounds.  Queen of the fields, she is.TREACHTwo hundred six pou--EPPSI ain't done, Treach.  Ain't I owed a minute to luxuriate on the work Patsey done?  TREACH...Sir...EPPSDamned Queen.  Born and bred to the field.  A nigger among niggers, and God give 'er to me.  A lesson in the rewards of righteous livin'.   All be observant ta that.  All!(beat)Now, Treach.  Now speak.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   79.TREACHOne hundred thirty eight pounds for Phebe.EPPSHit one forty five yesterday.  Pull her out.TREACHTwo hundred six pounds for Abram.EPPSHow much he pick yesterday?TREACHTwo hundred twenty nine pounds.Abram is pulled from the line, huddled with Solomon.EXT.  MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/YARD - EVENINGA flogging is going on.  Solomon, Phebe, and Abram are stripped and now being given a perfunctory whipping delivered by Epps.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - EVENINGEvening, but the day is not yet done.  Slaves attend their various evening chores; feeding livestock, doing laundry, cooking food.  There is no respite from a slave's charge.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTA fire is kindled in the cabin.  The slaves finally fix their own dinner of corn meal.  Corn is ground in a small hand mill.  The corn meal is mixed with a little water, placed in the fire and baked.  When it is "done brown" the ashes are scraped off.  Bacon is fried.  The slaves eat.As they eat, Abram goes on in great length and with much emotion about General Jackson.UNCLE ABRAMHold my words: General Jackson will forever be immortalized.  His bravery will be handed down to the last posterity.  If ever there be a stain upon "raw militia," he done wiped away on the eight of January.  I say da result a that day's battle is of 'mo importance to our grand nation than any occurrence 'fo or since.  Great man.  Great man in deed.  We all 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   80.
(MORE)need pray to Heavenly Father da General reign over us always.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTThe slaves are sleeping.  There is a loud commotion.  Epps enters, drunkenly, forcing the slaves awake.EPPSGet up!  Get up, we dance tonight!  We will not waste the evenin' with yer laziness.  Get up.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/MAIN HOUSE - NIGHTDespite the lateness of the hour, the slaves are up and now fully dressed.  They take up position in the middle of the floor.  They wait, poised like actors...  Solomon strikes up a tune and the slaves dance.  They do so very wearily.  The whole of it certainly more torture than pleasure.Epps, whip in hand:EPPSWhere's yah merriment?  Move yer feet.As the slaves twirl about Epps keeps an attentive eye on Patsey.  It should be quite clear that his primary motivation for holding dances is so that he may view Patsey twirl about the floor.  This fact is not lost on the Mistress Epps.  A few moments of Epps's lust on display is all that the Mistress can bear.  Jealousy mounting, she snatches up a CARAFE.  With all her might she throws it at Patsey.  It hits Patsey square in the face.  TOO THICK TO SHATTER, IT LEAVES HER BLOODY AND WRITHING ON THE FLOOR.  The dancing, the music stop.  The slaves, however, react as though it is not the first time they've seen as much from the Mistress.Mistress Epps, screaming like a hellion: MISTRESS EPPSSell her!  EPPSC'mon, now.  Wha's this?MISTRESS EPPSYou will sell the negress!EPPSYou're talkin' foolish.  Sell little Pats?  She pick with more 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   81.UNCLE ABRAM (CONT'D)
(MORE)vigor than any other nigger!  Choose another ta go.MISTRESS EPPSNo other.  Sell her!EPPSI will not!MISTRESS EPPSYou will remove that black bitch from this property, 'er I'll take myself back to Cheneyville.EPPSOh, the idleness of that yarn washes over me.  Do not set yourself up against Patsey, my dear.  That's a wager you will lose.  Calm yerself.  And settle for my affection, 'cause my affection you got.  Or, go.  'Cause I will rid myself of yah well before I do away with her!Mistress Epps stands irate, lost in fury and unable to even think of what to do.  Eventually, optionless, she storms away.For a few beats there is only the sound of Patsey sobbing.EPPS (CONT'D)That damned woman!  I won't have my mood spoiled.  I will not.  Dance!Epps sends the whip in Solomon's direction.  Solomon responds by playing.Treach literally drags the prone Patsey from the floor, blood still spilling from her face.  The slaves, as ordered, return to dancing.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - MORNINGThe sun has only just risen above the horizon.  FROM THE GREAT HOUSE THE HORN IS BLOWN signaling the start of another day.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - DAYSlaves are in the field picking cotton.  They accompany their work with a SPIRITUAL.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   82.EPPS (CONT'D)EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - LATERAs the slaves make their way in from the field, the Mistress calls to Solomon.  SHE HAS A PIECE OF PAPER IN HAND.MISTRESS EPPSPlatt...SOLOMONYes, Mistress.MISTRESS EPPSCan you find your way to Bartholomew's?SOLOMONI can, ma'am.Handing Solomon a sheet of paper.MISTRESS EPPSThis is a list of goods and sundries.  You will take it to be filled and return immediately.  Tell Bartholomew to add it to our debt.  SOLOMONI will, Mistress.Solomon looks at the list.  In a careless moment, Solomon reads quietly from it.  He catches himself, but not before the Mistress notes his action.  With high inquisitiveness:  MISTRESS EPPSWhere yah from, Platt?SOLOMONI have told you.MISTRESS EPPSTell me again.SOLOMONWashington.MISTRESS EPPSWho were yah Master?SOLOMONMaster name of Freeman.MISTRESS EPPSWas he a learned man?SOLOMONI suppose so.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   83.MISTRESS EPPSHe learn yah ta read?SOLOMONA word here or there, but I have no understanding of the written text.MISTRESS EPPS Don't trouble yer self with it.  Same as the rest, Master bought yah to work.  Tha's all.  And any more'll earn yah a hun'red lashes.Having delivered her cool advice, Mistress heads back into the house.INT. BARTHOLOMEW'S - LATERA general store in the township of Holmesville.  Solomon stands at the counter as BARTHOLOMEW fills Mistress Epps's order.  Among the items set before Solomon is a quantity of foolscrap.The items are collected for Solomon and placed in a sack.   Solomon giving little thought to them other than getting them back to the mistress.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - LATERSolomon returns and delivers the items to the Mistress.MISTRESS EPPSAny trouble?SOLOMONNo, ma'am.  No trouble.EXT. ROAD - DAYSolomon is running flat out along the road.  Running as though his life depended on getting to his destination in beyond a timely manner.EXT. SHAW'S PLANTATION - LATERStill running, slick with sweat, Solomon comes upon the SHAW PLANTATION.  It rivals that of Epps's in every way.  MASTER SHAW, A WHITE PLANTATION OWNER, IS ON THE LAWN GROOMING A HORSE.Sitting on the plantation's Piazza, Patsey is having tea with MISTRESS HARRIET SHAW, WHO IS A BLACK WOMAN.  Though once a slave, she is now comparatively refined though not wholly so.  The table where they sit is adorned with 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   84.white linens, and they are attended by a HOUSE NIGGER.  It makes for a bit of a surreal scene.As Solomon arrives:MASTER SHAWPlatt Epps, good Sunday morning.SOLOMONGood morning, Master Shaw.  I've been sent by Master to retrieve Patsey.  May I approach?MASTER SHAWYou may.Solomon makes his way over to the piazza.SOLOMONExcuse me, Mistress Shaw.MISTRESS SHAWNigger Platt.SOLOMONMy apologies.  Patsey, Master wishes you to return.PATSEYSabbath day.  I's free ta roam.  Massa know where I be.SOLOMONUnderstood.  But the Master sent me running to fetch you, and said no time should be wasted.MISTRESS SHAWDrink tea, Nigger Platt?SOLOMONThank you, Mistress, but I don't dare.MISTRESS SHAWWould you knowed Massa Epps's consternation ta be any lessened wit your timely return?  Anger be his constant condition.  Sit, Nigger Platt.  Sit and drink the tea that offered.Solomon knows better, but he sits and the Mistress has tea poured for him.MISTRESS SHAW (CONT'D)What'n was Epps's concern?SOLOMON...I'd rather not say...12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   85.MISTRESS SHAWL'il gossip on the Sabbath be fine.  All things in moderation.Solomon is not sure what to say.  He struggles to be as diplomatic as possible.SOLOMONAs you are aware, Master Epps can be a man of a hard countenance.  There are times when it is impossible to account for his logic.  You know he has ill feelings toward your husband.  MISTRESS SHAWHe do.SOLOMONMaster Epps has somehow come to believe, as incorrectly as it may be, that Master Shaw is...  That he is something of a lothario and an unprincipled man.  A misguided belief born out of their mutual competition as planters, no doubt.  MISTRESS SHAWNo doubt...if not born outta truth itself.The Mistress waves to Shaw.  Shaw, unsuspecting of the conversation, waves back.SOLOMONI'm certain, with regard to Patsey's well being, Master Epps concern is only to mind what is his.MISTRESS SHAWNothin' Epps desire come outta concern.  It all outta jealously.SOLOMONI meant no disrespect.MISTRESS SHAWHe ain't heard you.SOLOMONI meant no disrespect to you, Mistress.MISTRESS EPPSHa!  You worry for me?  Got no cause to worry for my senses.  Nigger Epps, I ain't felt the end of a lash in 'mo years than I cain recall.  Ain't worked a field, 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   86.
(MORE)neither.  Where one time I served, now I got others servin' me.  The cost to my current existence be Massa Shaw broadcasting his affections.  'N me enjoining his pantomime of fidelity.  If that what keep me from the cotton pickin' niggers, that what it be.  A small and reasonable price to be paid 'fo sure.Looking toward Patsey:MISTRESS SHAWI knowed what it like to be the object of Massa's predilections and peculiarities.  And I knowed they can get expressed with kindness or wit violence.  A lusty visit in the night, or a visitation from the whip.  And wit my experience, if'n I can give comfort, then comfort I give.  And you take comfort, Patsey; the Good Lord will manage Epps.  In His own time the Good Lord will manage dem all.  Yes, Lordy, there's a day comin' that will burn as an oven.  May be sooner, or it may be later, but it comin' as sure as the Lord is just.  When His will be done...the curse on the Pharos is a poor example of all that wait 'fo the plantation class.As if to punctuate her thought, the Mistress takes a sip of her tea.EXT. EPPS'S PLANTATION - LATERSolomon and Patsey are returning from Shaw's.  Waiting on the porch of the Great House, a drunk Epps beckons for Patsey to go to him.  Aware of his lewd intentions, knowing what's waiting for her, Patsey begins to lightly cry.PATSEYPlatt...  De old hog-jaw beckon.SOLOMONDo not look in his direction.  Continue on as though he's gone unobserved by you.Epps does not care to be ignored.  He lifts himself and moves toward the pair in a rage.EPPSPatsey...!12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   87.MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)Solomon moves between Epps and Patsey, cutting Epps off as Patsey continues on.  Playing up his "ignorance" of the situation:SOLOMONFound her, Master, and brought her back just as instructed.EPPSWhat'd you tell her?  What'd you say to Pats?SOLOMONNo words were spoken.  None of consequence.EPPSLie!  Damned liar!  Saw you talkin' with 'er jus now.  Tell me!SOLOMONI cannot speak of what did not occur.Epps grabs Solomon.EPPSI'll cut your black throat.Solomon pulls away from Epps, ripping his shirt in the process.  Epps gives chase.  Solomon begins to run around the cotton field, easily keeping his distance.  Epps, however is undeterred.  He moves after Solomon as speedily as he can, which isn't very speedily at all.  And quickly he tires.  He's forced to bend over and suck air.  Solomon maintains his distance, barely breathing hard.  His breath returned to him, Epps starts up the chase again.  Solomon runs on out of reach.  Shortly, Epps again stops, gets his breath...  And now in what should be quite comical, Epps again runs after Solomon.  Again, Epps vigor leaves him before he can even get close to the slave.  Dropping down to the dirt, in a show of regret and piety:EPPS (CONT'D)Platt...  Platt, liquor filled me.  I admit that it did, and I done over reacted.  It's the Lord's day.  Ain't nothin' Christian in us carryin' on like this.  Help me ta my feet, and let us both pray forgiveness.Epps extends a hand to Solomon.  Cautiously, Solomon moves close, but not too close.  As Solomon draws within striking distance, Epps lunges for him.  He chases Solomon on until he is again out of breath and once more drops down.  And again offering a treaty:12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   88.EPPS (CONT'D)Platt...Platt, I'm all done in.  I have met my limitations, and I ain't equal to 'em.  I concede to yah, but in the name of valor, help yer master to his feet.Solomon cautiously moves closer to help.  Again he is attacked by Epps - this time by knife.  Sort of.  Epps is too drunk and tired to fully open the blade - and chased far around the field by Epps.  ALL OF THE PRECEDING SHOULD BE MORE FUNNY THAN SHOCKING.  A CHANGE OF PACE FROM THE OTHERWISE NECESSARY BLEAKNESS OF SLAVE LIFE.At the house appears Mistress Epps.MISTRESS EPPSPlatt...  Platt!Solomon goes to her.MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)Wha's the commotion?SOLOMONA misunderstanding is all.  It began when I was sent to retrieve Patsey from where she'd taken sabbatical at Master Shaw's.  Upon returning, Master Epps believed Patsey and me to be in conversation when we were not all.  I tried to explain, but it lead to all this.MISTRESS EPPSEdwin!  Edwin, bring yerself ta me.Sheepishly, he goes to the Mistress.MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)What is it?  What is yer fascination with Pats?EPPSI wouldn't say it--MISTRESS EPPSYa cain't remain the Sabbath without her under your eye?  Ya are a no-account bastard.EPPSHold a moment...MISTRESS EPPSA filthy, godless heathen.  My bed is too holy for yah ta share.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   89.EPPSWha's...wha's he been tellin' yah?MISTRESS EPPSOf yer misbegotten ways.EPPSAnd he would know what of anythin'?  I ain't even spoken with him today.  Platt, yah lyin' nigger, have I?  Have I?Discretion being the better part and all, Solomon remains silent.EPPS (CONT'D)There; there's all the truth he got.  Damned nigger.  Damn yah.Epps push back into the house.  The Mistress follows.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - DAYWith the sun yet again high in the sky the slaves are working the field picking cotton.  As before they sing a spiritual, the only thing that distracts them from the tedium at hand.  But there is no distracting from the heat.  We see Henry begin to falter before it...  And eventually collapse right in the dirt.  Though the other slaves take note, none move to help him.  None dare.From Treach rather matter of factly: TREACHGet him water.Edward runs to fetch a gourd.  He carries it to Henry, DUMPS THE WATER ON HIM, BUT DOES NOT ACTUALLY GIVE HENRY ANYTHING TO DRINK.Roused, Henry rights himself.EDWARDGo'won.  Git up.Unsteadily, Henry lifts himself and heads back into the field.  He joins in again with the spiritual, as if the song is all that can keep him going.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACKS - NIGHTThe slaves are asleep.  Epps arrives, again without knocking, with his whip in hand.  The slaves stir.  Bob asks:12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   90.BOBWe dance tonight, massa?Epps remains quietly focused on Patsey.  And it's clear from her apprehensive expression just what it is he's come looking for.  This time there is no escaping it.  As if to acknowledge the badness to come, Phebe lightly cries.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - NIGHTWE MAKE A HARD CUT TO THE FIELD.  Lit by moonlight, the cotton sets off an otherworldly glow.  Into this space Epps is dragging Patsey.  Far out into the field, he stops, stands as if gathering his manhood, then he's all over Patsey.  He is rough and clumsy.  It looks like something between an awkward rape and a virgin attempting his first sexual encounter.Patsey does not respond in any way other than to continually turn her head from Epps, but otherwise remain as still as possible.  If there is such a thing, she is vicious with her passive aggressiveness.  Epps's frustration mounts until - as the Mistress Shaw had cautioned - he crosses the line from passion to violence.  He begins slapping Patsey to get a response from her.  When that fails, he punches her which only leads to him taking up his whip and lashing Patsey MERCILESSLY.  Still, she gives him nothing.  Beaten, Patsey sits in the dirt among the cotton, Epps deep breathing above her.  The desire for sex now having left him.  Epps heads from the field.  Patsey is left where she is.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - DAYAs Solomon makes his way back from the field, Mistress Epps calls to him.  As previously, she has a list in hand that she holds out to him.MISTRESS EPPSPlatt...INT. BARTHOLOMEW'S - LATERAs before, Solomon waits as Bartholomew fills Mistress Epps order.  Among the items set before Solomon is another quantity of foolscrap.EXT. ROAD - LATERSolomon is making his way back to the Epps plantation.  He carries with him a sack filled with the goods from the store.  As he walks, SOLOMON LOOKS AROUND CASUALLY.  When 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   91.he is certain he is alone, he sets down the sack, opens it and appropriates A SINGLE SHEET OF THE PAPER which he folds and places in his pocket.  That done, he cinches up the sack and continues on his way.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - LATERSolomon returns and delivers the items to the Mistress.MISTRESS EPPSNo issues, Platt?SOLOMONNo issue, Mistress.INT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - LATERSolomon takes the slip of paper and hides it within his fiddle.  Perhaps the safest place he can think of.  He acts as though he's hiding away found gold.  In reality it's more than that.  The paper for him is a first step toward freedom.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/MAIN HOUSE - EVENINGIt's another night of Epps's forced revelry.  Coming in quick from the previous scene, we go from Solomon holding his fiddle, to playing it as the slaves are again made to dance.Mistress Epps brings out a tray of freshly baked pastries.  She sets them down on a table.MISTRESS EPPSA moment from the dancing.  Come sample what I baked for y'all.The slaves, thankful for the rest as much as the food, file toward the tray reciting a chorus of "Thank you, Mistress."  As Patsey moves toward the pastries: MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)There'll be none for you, Patsey.Patsey merely turns away.  Her non responsiveness, however, serves only to incite the Mistress.  Screaming:MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)Yah see that?  Did yah see the look of insolence she give me?EPPSSeen nothin' but her turn away.MISTRESS EPPSIt was hot, hateful scorn.  It filled that black face.  Yah tell 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   92.
(MORE)me yah did'n see it, then yah choose not to look, or yah sayin' I lie.EPPSWhatever it was, it passed.MISTRESS EPPSIs that how you are with the niggers?  Let every ill thought fester in 'em.  Look at 'em.  They foul with it; foul with their hate.  You let it be, it'll come back to us in the dark a night.  Yah want that?  Yah want them black animals to leave us gut like pigs in our own sleep?Epps isn't sure how to respond to the inchoate berating.  It's an invitation for the Mistress to continue.MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)You are manless.  A damned eunuch if ever there was.  And if yah won't stand for me, I'd pray you'd at least be a credit to yer own kind and beat every foul thought from 'em.Epps does nothing.  The Mistress lets her anger loose.  She moves quickly to Patsey, DRIVES HER NAILS INTO THE SLAVE'S FACE AND DRAWS THEM DOWN ACROSS HER FEATURES.  FIVE DEEP AND BLOODY GASHES ARE LEFT IN PATSEY'S SKIN, the moment marked with appropriate screams.  Patsey collapses on the floor, covering her bleeding face.Mistress Epps:MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)Beat it from 'em!Thoroughly cuckolded by the Mistress's actions, Epps takes his whip and pulls Patsey out of the house.  His intentions are plain.All the slaves remain silent.  The Mistress, however, displaying high satisfaction, entreats the others:  MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)Eat.  Fill yourselves.  ...And then we dance.They eat, but without a hint of levity.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTWe come up on the slaves who lay sleeping.  All except for Patsey.  She rises from her bedding, goes to a corner 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   93.MISTRESS EPPS (CONT'D)of the cabin and removes something from a secretive location.  She then moves over to Platt.PATSEYPlatt...  Platt, you awake?SOLOMONI am.PATSEYI have a request; an act of kindness.Patsey displays what she took from hiding.  It is a LADY'S FINGER RING.PATSEY (CONT'D)I secreted it from the Mistress.SOLOMONReturn it!PATSEYIt yours, Platt.  SOLOMON...For what cause?PATSEYAll I ask: end my life.  Take my body to the margin of the swamp--Solomon looks at Patsey as though she were insane.SOLOMONNo.PATSEYTake me by the throat.  Hold me low in the water until I's still 'n without life.  Bury me in a lonely place of dyin'.SOLOMONNo!  I will do no such thing.  The...the gory detail with which you speak--PATSEYI thought on it long and hard.SOLOMONHow does such despair even come to you?PATSEYHow can you not see it?  I got no comfort in this life; caught up between Massa's lust 'n Mistress's 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   94.
(MORE)hate.  If I cain't buy mercy from yah, I'll beg it. SOLOMONThere are others.  Beg them.  Why do you consign me to eternal damnation with such an un-Godly request?PATSEYThere is God here!  God is merciful, and He forgive merciful acts.  Won't be no hell for you, Platt.  But you leave me damned with every breath I draw.   Born into this station, twenty-two year I suffer.  My body so rent it 'mo scars than flesh.  End my misery, Platt.  Do what I ain't got the strength ta do myself.  End it.Solomon says nothing.  Clearly he's not about to do the deed.  As if delivering a curse:PATSEY (CONT'D)One day I will look upon yah, 'n you'll know yah shoulda freed me when there was the chance.BLACKEXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - DAYHard times on the planation.  Where previously the field in bloom was a carpet of white, it is now patchy and under grown.The slaves move through the field picking not cotton, but rather CATERPILLARS from the plants.  The caterpillars have dined on the cotton and nearly destroyed the crop.Epps is beside himself as he looks out over his ruined field.EPPSIt is a plague.TREACHCaterpillars.EPPSA plague!  It's damn Biblical.  Two season God done sent a plague to smite me.  I am near ruination.  Why Treach?  What I done that God hate me so?  Do I not preach His word?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   95.PATSEY (CONT'D)TREACHThe whole Bayou is suffering.EPPSI don't care nothin' fer the damn Bayou.  I'm sufferin'.Epps looks among his slaves at work, his enmity growing.EPPS (CONT'D)It's that Godless lot.  They brought this on me.  I bring 'em God's word, and heathens they are, they brung me God's scorn.Crazed, Epps runs into the field, taking himself from slave to slave delivering a whipping to all he can lay his hands on.EPPS (CONT'D)Damn you!  Damn you all!  Damn you!EXT. ROAD - DAYHenry, Bob, Edward and Solomon are being transported in a cart driven by Epps.  SOLOMON HAS HIS FIDDLE WITH HIM.Along the way, on the side of the road, they see a SLAVE BEING ATTACKED BY DOGS as PATROLLERS - BOTH WHITES AND A FEW NATIVE AMERICANS - just stand and watch.  The poor slave lets out an AGONIZING SCREECH as he is ripped at by the animals.  A horrific sight, but a far too common end for slaves that seek freedom by running.EXT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION - EVENINGEpps delivers his slaves to JUDGE TURNER, a distinguished man and extensive planter whose large estate is situated on Bayou Salle within a few miles of the gulf.  Epps and Turner stand off to one side engaged in bargaining as Henry, Bob, Edward and Solomon wait and watch. As they wait, playing in the near background, another group of SLAVES near a wagon are being divvied up.  Among them are a MALE SLAVE, and a FEMALE SLAVE.  She is perhaps his wife, or his sister...  Some relation.   For whatever capricious reason, the Male Slave is herded back to the wagon while the Female is forced to stay.  Clearly the pair are being split up, AS WE HAVE SEEN FAR TO OFTEN WITH BLACK FAMILIES TO THIS POINT.  This time, the Male Slave will not remain idle as his relation is taken from him.  He tries to claw past the OVERSEERS screaming for her.The Overseers beat the man down, beat him back to wagon.  Despite this, the man continues to yell after the woman as the wagon pulls away.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   96.The woman is comforted by another female slave, ANNA, who herself seems traumatized by both the physical and psychological violence of the events..Seemingly oblivious to what has just transpired, Epps returns to his slaves and gives a parting salutation.EPPSYer Judge Turner's for the season.  For more if need be, until my crop return.  It's my little fortune he'll even have yah.  Every planter in the bayou is trying to unload his niggers on 'em.  So yah'll bring no disrespect to me, and yah'll bring no biblical plagues to him.  Be decent, ere I will return to deliver an ungodly whippin'.INT. SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTSlaves are crammed into the shack - LITERALLY ON TOP OF EACH OTHER - as they try to sleep.  Some lay, some sit up.  Packed in like cattle, there is barely room to move let alone draw a deep, clean breath.  There is a real risk of suffocating in the mass.  Among them some cough and wheeze.  A CHILD CRIES...  Among them is Solomon who must believe at this point that his life has reached its very lowest point.  The odds of survival are slight, let alone the chance of actually ever returning to his family.  This clearly weighs on him as he struggles to find anything like comfortable space in the pen.EXT. CANE FIELDS - DAYAn OVERSEER is explaining to the new slaves - SOLOMON AMONG THEM - how to cultivate cane.  WITH A KNIFE IN HAND he demonstrates the process:OVERSEERDraw the cane from the rick, cut the top and flags from the stalk, understand?  Leave only that part which is sound and healthy.  Cast off the rest...EXT. CANE FIELDS - DAYABOUT THIRTY SLAVES are working the field.  They are divided into THREE GANGS.  The first which draw the cane, the next lay the cane in the drill, the last then hoe the rows after.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   97.Solomon is among a gang that draws and cuts, and he moves with speed and skill.  Certainly more so than he displayed picking cotton.Standing with his overseer, Judge Turner watches.INT. SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTAgain, the slaves have been herded into the shack and pressed together.As he tries to rest - sleep is nearly impossible - Solomon finds himself face to face with a woman, ANNA - the woman who we caught for a moment previously.  She is awake.  For a few beats she avoids eye contact with Solomon.  If not in regard for what personal space he has, then for a certain trepidation she seems to have and desire to carry alone.  She seem, like Solomon, to be unaccustomed to her surroundings and horribly frightened by them.  Eventually her eyes meet Solomon's.  She makes no sound, but great apprehension spills from her eyes.  Whatever's next, whatever horror awaits, she can barely stand to face.  Fear, proximity...  They drive her hand to Solomon's.  After a moment of seemingly reacquainting herself with genuine human contact, the woman TAKES SOLOMON'S HAND AND PRESSES IT TO HER BREAST.  Solomon tries to jerk his hand away, but ANNA HOLDS IT IN PLACE.  Manipulating Solomon's hand, she begins to massage her breast.  Solomon takes no real pleasure in the act - really, neither does Anna.  THERE SHOULD BE A TRUE SENSE ANNA IS JUST SO VERY, VERY DESPERATE FOR HUMAN CONTACT, FOR THE NEED TO FEEL ALIVE AND LIKE A PERSON RATHER THAN AN ANIMAL THAT EMOTIONALLY SHE IS WILLING TO ENGAGE SOLOMON.The need quickly compounds.  Anna presses her lips to Solomon's.  Eventually, SHE DIRECTS HIS HAND BENEATH HER DRESS AND BETWEEN HER LEGS.  Solomon, with slightly more compassion than a guy making union wages, BEGINS TO MANIPULATE ANNA WITH HIS HAND.  The act remains more perfunctory than passionate.  We can see Anna moving toward climax and eventual release.  But more - or substantially less - than joyous sex, it is really just a drug-like inoculation against reality.  But the feeling quickly fades.  All that remains, as with most chance encounters, is regret.And there is shame, too.  This is put on display as Anna turns away from Solomon.  As quickly as it began, it is as though the act had not happened at all.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - MORNINGSlaves are making their way out to the cane field.  As Solomon trudges off to labor, he notices a wagon being LOADED UP WITH FEMALE SLAVES.  Among them is ANNA, fear quite thick on her face as she is about to be delivered 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   98.to some as of yet unknown fate.  As little as he knows of her, as awkward as it was, the pair shared a moment and it is a moment not easily discarded.  Solomon is almost unconsciously propelled toward Anna.  Before Solomon can close the distance, the DRIVER chides the horse team and the wagon departs.Anna again looks back to Solomon, her eyes quietly pleading for him to do...something.  But there is nothing for him to do.  Nothing he can do.  The wagon rolls on...and then it and Anna are gone.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - EVENINGSegregated slightly from other salves, Solomon sits before a small fire.  A thought comes to Solomon.  Crossing to some fencing, he tears loose a bit of wire.   With the wire Solomon fashions a loop.  Holding the wire to the flame of the fire, Solomon heats it until it glows, takes a moment...THEN PRESSES THE LOOP TO THE FLESH OF HIS LEFT INNER-FOREARM.  He winces greatly, and his eyes well not merely from the pain of the burns, but from other complexities as well.  Solomon repeats the process again and again, renting his flesh in near self-mutilation - as though doing penance - and circling the burns until the marks resemble the STAIN GLASS FLOWER ELIZABETH HAD MADE FOR HIM.  Here, at nearly his lowest point, Solomon literally burns the memory of his family onto himself.EXT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - EVENINGSolomon waits outside the house on the porch.  As he waits he slides his finger tips over his still freshly-burned tattoo.  A HOUSE NIGGER approaches and admonishes Solomon.HOUSE NIGGEROff the porch.  Get off.Like a dog shooed away, Solomon steps down.  Eventually Judge Turner exits the house and crosses to Solomon.SOLOMON...Sir...JUDGE TURNERPlatt is it?  Have you cultivated cane previously?SOLOMONNo, sir, I have not.JUDGE TURNERYou take to it quite naturally.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   99.SOLOMONI surprise myself.  I was poor for cotton picking, and suffered the lash on a schedule.  For whatever reason the Lord has chosen to give me skills in the cane he has withheld otherwise.JUDGE TURNERFrom where do you hail?SOLOMONWashington, sir.JUDGE TURNERAnd upon bill of sale, here you came directly?SOLOMONSir.JUDGE TURNERYou play the fiddle?SOLOMONI do.JUDGE TURNERWhere did you learn?SOLOMONOver time.  Here and there.JUDGE TURNERAre you educated?SOLOMONNiggers are hired to work, not to read and write.JUDGE TURNEREpps warned that I should mind you above all.  However, I cannot help but take note of you.  You don't carry yourself like the other niggers, and I sense that you have seen more of the world than you admit.SOLOMONI am just what is before you, sir.  Nothing more.If anything Turner is impressed by Solomon's ability to dodge.JUDGE TURNERWhat is before me is far too clever to be relegated to the field.  You are to be elevated to 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   100.
(MORE)a driver in the sugar house.  We'll see if you take to the whip as well as the cane.  You'll board with the other trustees. SOLOMONSir.JUDGE TURNERAnd Platt, now and again I hear of patrons in need of a good fiddler.  I will pass along your name.  What you earn is yours to keep.INT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION/SUGAR HOUSE - DAYThe mill is an "immense brick building" where the cane is refined.  There is much machinery: boilers, an endless carrier made of chain and wood...  The sugar house is worked by ADULT SLAVES AND CHILDREN ALIKE.A BLACK DRIVER hands Solomon a lash.  Though well familiar with being on the receiving end of the whip, Solomon is unsure of how to handle the business end.SOLOMONHow do I use it?DRIVERIt's a lash.  Easy as usin' a door knob.  'Cept wit a lash people pay ya mind.INT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION/SUGAR HOUSE - LATERSLAVES working, toiling.  Solomon watches over them, but does little else.  The OVERSEER, not satisfied with the work being done, calls to Solomon.SUGAR HOUSE OVERSEERDrive them niggers!SOLOMON USES THE LASH SPARINGLY AND POORLY, barely touching the slaves before him.  The Overseer does not hesitate in using the lash on Solomon.SUGAR HOUSE OVERSEER (CONT'D)Drive them niggers.Solomon uses the lash again, but this time with more authority.  What choice does he have?EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - LATERWork over, the slaves congregate to eat.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   101.JUDGE TURNER (CONT'D)As Solomon eats, he takes note of the JUICE FROM SOME BERRIES ON HIS PLATE.EXT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION - EVENINGWe see a DUCK making its way along a water bank.  Moving quickly, Solomon LEAPS INTO FRAME and pounces on it.  The bird in grasp, Solomon pulls a feather loose.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - NIGHTSecreted away out near the edge of the bayou and sitting by a small fire, Solomon takes the slip of paper from his fiddle.  It is yellowed, showing age, but still usable.  Dipping the duck's feather - a quill - into the crushed berries, Solomon attempts to write a bit on the paper.  The berry juice, too free-flowing, is unusable as ink.Solomon returns the paper to the fiddle.  He has some scraps of food with him, which he snacks on.INT. YARNEY'S HOUSE - EVENINGA party has commenced at the noble home of one MR. YARNEY.  A group of REVELERS have gathered and are on the dance floor.  As entertainment, SOLOMON PLAYS THE FIDDLE, and does so with his usual liveliness.  Clearly a good time is being had by all.INT. YARNEY'S HOUSE/STUDY - LATERGay voices filter from the main room as off in a study stand Solomon and Yarney.  A very pleased Mr. Yarney is presenting Solomon with 17 dollars in coins.YARNEYI have never seen it before; merry makers so pleased with a performance they take up a contribution.  Seventeen dollars, Platt.  I'd say that'd make you a millionaire among niggers.  Certainly the wealthiest on the Bayou.  And how will you spend it?  Furniture for your cabin, a pocket knife, perhaps.  A coat, hat?  Some smart new shoes.SOLOMONI cannot say.  I am too amazed by the amount.YARNEYSeventeen dollars.  The world is yours.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   102.EXT. ROAD - EVENINGSolomon is returning to Judge Turner's on foot.  There is only the moonlight with which to light his way.  As he travels, Solomon hears steps behind him.  He turns and sees TWO BLACKS.  Solomon relaxes.  Fellow blacks; surely they mean him no harm.  As Solomon looks them over carefully - their clothes tatters and they themselves covered in dirt - it becomes quite clear they are not just slaves.  A fact confirmed when they step menacingly toward Solomon, ONE WITH A SHIV IN HAND.At first it seems they want his money.  Worse, THEY GO FOR HIS FIDDLE.Solomon has but a moment to brace himself before he is attacked, TAKING A CUT TO THE ARM.  Solomon fights back, picking up a pine knot and striking his attacker over the head.  That takes the fight out of him, and both men retreat back the way they came leaving Solomon be.INT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION/SUGAR HOUSE - DAYSolomon is again driving slaves, using the whip to spur them to work harder.  He does so with perhaps a bit more vigor; his displaced anger directed at the slaves before him.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - NIGHTAlone out on the edge of the Bayou, Solomon is playing a low air on his violin WHILE SNACKING ON SCRAPS OF BACON.  As he plays, something appears in the distance.  From the edge of the bayou, coming forth like an apparition arisen from the earth, is CELESTE.  She is a young woman of about 19 years of age and far whiter than most blacks.  "IT REQUIRED CLOSE INSPECTION TO DISTINGUISH IN HER FEATURE THE SLIGHTEST TRACE OF AFRICAN BLOOD."  Beyond that, she is pale and haggard, but still lovely.Celeste moves to Solomon without fear or hesitation.  As Solomon, startled, takes her in, Celeste says quite plainly:CELESTEI am hungry.  Give me food.SOLOMONWho are you?CELESTEI'm hungry.SOLOMONAll I have are some scraps of bacon.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   103.Solomon gives her some of his food.  Celeste, famished, devours it.SOLOMON (CONT'D)What is your name?CELESTEMy name is Celeste.SOLOMONWhat are your circumstances?CELESTEI belong ta Massa Carey, and 'ave been two days among da palmettoes.  Celeste is sick and cain't work, and would rather die in the swamp than be whipped to death by the overseer.  So I took myself away.  Massa's dogs won't follow me.  The patrollers 'ave tried to set dem on me.  But dey a secret between dem and Celeste, and dey won't mind the devilish orders of the overseer.  Celeste lifts her head from the food she gnaws on.CELESTE (CONT'D)Do you believe me?SOLOMONYes.CELESTEWhy?SOLOMONThere are some whose tracks the hounds will refuse to follow.CELESTEGive me more food.  I'm starvin'.SOLOMONThis is all my allowance for the rest of--CELESTEGive it to me.Almost as if compelled, Solomon does as ordered.  As she eats, Celeste aggrandizes herself:CELESTE (CONT'D)Most slaves escape at night.  The overseers are alert for such chicanes.  But Celeste tricked dem 'n alight in the middle of the day wit the sun up at its highest.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   104.
(MORE)The place of my concealment now deep in the swamp, not half a mile from Massa's plantation, and a world apart.   A world a tall trees whose long arms make fo' a canopy so dense dey keep away even the beams of the sun.  It twilight always in Celeste's world, even in the brightest day.  I will live there, and I will live freely.  The overseers are a cowardly lot.  Dey will not go where their dogs show fear and where it always be night.  Others will join me, in the twilight and we ain't gunna be slaves no 'mo forever.Solomon isn't sure what to say.  Before he can say anything:CELESTE (CONT'D)Celeste will come to you again in the night.  You will have food for her.Celeste departs the way she came; as though she were a vision.EXT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION/FOOD STORAGE - NIGHTSolomon stealthfully makes his way into the storage shed.  Dried and smoked meats are hung, and milled corn is about.  Taking out a handkerchief, Solomon begins to load it with food.  Not too much.  Not so much his thievery will be readily noticed, but he does avail himself.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - NIGHTSolomon plays his violin, but plays it with an anxious nature as he waits.Then, as before, a figure appears in the distance.  It is Celeste coming out of the night.  She makes her way directly to Solomon.  With no greeting, she asks:CELESTEI am hungry.Solomon gives Celeste the handkerchief he's filled.  She opens it, and begins to devour the food.  As she eats, she asks:CELESTE (CONT'D)I was rude, and didn't even ask yo name.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   105.CELESTE (CONT'D)SOLOMONPlatt.(beat)Solomon.  Solomon is my true name.CELESTEWas you free?SOLOMONI was.  I am.  Solomon exposes his wrist, displays his tattoo as he announces:SOLOMON (CONT'D)I remain free in my heart.Giving a laugh as though it's the silliest thing she's heard.CELESTEFree heart means nothin if'n yo body gunna die a slave.SOLOMONI will not.CELESTECeleste knows you ain't gunna run.  Celeste knows it ain't your nature.SOLOMONI have other plans.  Celeste gives a look.  She is curious to hear more.  Solomon, both conspiratorially and accentuating what he considers to be his own cleverness:SOLOMON (CONT'D)I have secreted a piece of paper.  Just a slip of foolscrap.  I have kept it safe and dry for years on.  Nearly relinquished my life protecting it.  I am experimenting with ways to create ink.  When that is accomplished I will write a letter.CELESTEA letter to...?SOLOMONThere are those in New York of much substance who will spare no energy to secure my liberty.  Once I have the letter to them, it is only a matter of time before I am free.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   106.CELESTEHow'll ya mail da letter?  Who will trust to post it?  A nigger that can read and write is a nigger that'll hang.Solomon can't answer this question.  It is the glaring hole in his plan.  CELESTE (CONT'D)No.  Solomon will never again see New York.  Celeste's words is harsh, I know, but dey true.  I entreat yah to come live wit me in the constant twilight.  I entreat yah for your body to not die no slave.Having finished eating:CELESTE (CONT'D)Celeste will come again in de night.  You will bring her 'mo food.SOLOMONI risk discovery to take more.CELESTEYou will bring Celeste 'mo food.And with that Celeste again moves back into the darkness.INT. TURNER PLANTATION/SUGAR HOUSE - DAYSolomon is at his station driving slaves.  A WHITE FIELD OVERSEER approaches, his countenance quite stern.FIELD OVERSEERPlatt.  Come along.  Solomon fears his thievery has been discovered.  He begins to remove his whip.FIELD OVERSEER (CONT'D)Naw.  Bring yer whip.Solomon follows the Overseer from the Sugar House.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - MOMENTS LATERSolomon is walked out to the field.  The two slaves who previously attacked Solomon in the night are present.  Both are bound and muzzled strictly and look to have already been thoroughly beaten.  There, too, is Judge Turner along with a couple of WHITE PATROLLERS and several NATIVE AMERICANS who have captured the runaways.  There is one among the group who is of MIXED RACE, black 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   107.and Native American.  Though his skin is fairer as would be a Native American, HIS HAIR HAS THE KINK OF AN AFRO.The Judge asks of Solomon:JUDGE TURNERDo you recognize them, Platt?  Are these the pair who accosted you?Solomon stares, but does not dare answer. JUDGE TURNER (CONT'D)Runaways from a plantation in the vicinity of Lamourie.  Hidden away for three weeks.  The Bayou is full with them.  Look carefully.  Are they those who meant to take your life?SOLOMONI don't know their intent.JUDGE TURNERWhat else could it be?  Beyond their hunger and desperation, their heads are filled to the point of lunacy with mythic idyll of life in the north.  Nothing good will ever come of a nigger in flight.    SOLOMONI cannot say what plans they held for me.JUDGE TURNERBut these are the two, then?  SOLOMONI am uncertain.JUDGE TURNERYou may have your satisfaction with them.  You deserve as much and they deserve no better.SOLOMONMaster, I am uncertain.JUDGE TURNERLook.  Look careful.Solomon does, but does not reply.JUDGE TURNER (CONT'D)Even to you the features of your own kind are indistinguishable.  The eyes.  Subdued, and their eyes still burn.  Is their hate familiar to you?  Is it the hate 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   108.
(MORE)that came at you in the night?  Have your way with them, Platt.Solomon does not move for his whip.  He says as convincingly as possible.SOLOMONThey are not the ones.Turner may not quite believe Solomon, but he does not speak against him.  The Judge to the Patrollers:JUDGE TURNERReturn them to Lamourie, but strip them bare and parade them in the streets.  Make a show of it.  A reminder to all the price of flight is of no bad consequence.  Back to work, Platt.Solomon watches at the slaves are stripped of the remainder of their clothing and are dragged away.JUDGE TURNER (CONT'D)No worries, Platt.  We'll have your niggers soon enough.BLACKEXT. TURNER PLANTATION - EVENINGSolomon is picking at the bark of a white maple.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - EVENINGIn a tin cup, over a fire, Solomon boils the white maple bark in just a bit of water.INT. JUDGE TURNER'S PLANTATION/SLAVES CABIN - NIGHTAs others sleep, by the light of dying coals, Solomon uses the quill to test the boiled bark.  The liquid holds as a form of ink.  It is not ideal, but it is legible on the page.  Armed with this, Solomon writes his letter.EXT. TURNER PLANTATION - NIGHTSolomon sits with Celeste.  He relates his news to her.SOLOMONI have my letter.  I succeeded in making ink by boiling white maple bark.  When all were asleep in the cabin, by the light of the coals, lying upon my plank couch I 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   109.JUDGE TURNER (CONT'D)
(MORE)managed to complete a somewhat lengthy epistle.  The letter is directed to an old acquaintance at Sandy Hill stating my condition and urging him to take measures to restore me to liberty.CELESTEYah has your freedom then?SOLOMONAll that remains is to contrive measures by which the letter can safely be deposited in the post office.When Celeste speaks she is quite melancholy.CELESTEI have resolved to return to my Massa.Solomon gives an unnerved look.  This is not good news.SOLOMONIs it more food you need?CELESTEI live in fear.SOLOMONNone will come after you in the swamps.CELESTEIt ain't the patrollers I scared of...  At all seasons the howling of wild animals can be heard at night along the border of the swamps.  At first their calls were welcomin'.  Dey too was free, 'n I thought dey greeted me like a sistah.  Lately, dey cries have turned horrifyin'.SOLOMONThe solitude plays tricks.  It's your impression, nothing more.CELESTESeveral times now they made me a midnight call, awakening me from what little sleep I take wit a terrifyin' growl.  They mean to kill Celeste.SOLOMONIf you go back to your master you face the same.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   110.SOLOMON (CONT'D)CELESTEMy freedom been nothin' but a daydream.  So was Celeste's thoughts of slaves conjoinin' in the bayou.  It is lonely dwellin' waiting for others who won't never come.SOLOMONBetter the loneliness.  You have been free most of the summer.  Return now and your master will make example of you.  Celeste, go north.  Make your way by night...CELESTEIt'll only be worse if'n Celeste don't go back of her own will.SOLOMONYou won't be caught.  The dogs won't track you.  You are...you are unique.  Please, Celeste...Celeste considers this.  But her course of action is clear:  CELESTEYou got alternatives, Solomon.  Celeste got no one to write a letter to.As if to punctuate her resolve, without a word more Celeste departs toward the swamp.SOLOMONCeleste...  Celeste!She continues on and disappears into the night.  Solomon will never see her again.BLACKEXT. EPPS'S PLANTATION - DAYWe come up now outside of Master Epps's plantation.  Epps stands in the drive.  He's in surprisingly good spirits as Solomon - AGED SEVERAL YEARS NOW - Wiley and Bob trudge their way toward Epps and his other slaves who are gathered.The cotton field is in full bloom, the crop fully returned.  EPPSA joyous day.  A joyous day.  Dark times is behind us.  Clean livin' 'n prayer done lifted the plague.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   111.Indicating to the cotton:EPPS (CONT'D)As thick 'n white as New England snow.  'N now my niggers is returned to me.(to Solomon)Heard Judge Turner made you a driver.  A driver?  Oh, did you beguile him, Platt, with your slick nigger ways?  Well, yah won't stand idle with a lash in hand.  Not on my land.  Much work to do.  Days of old long since, eh?  Joyous indeed.Throughout Epps's welcome, Solomon's focus is on Patsey who is lined up with the other slaves.  SHE IS NOW MORE HAGGARD THAN WHEN WE LAST SAW HER.  Her face and arms display many new scars.  It's clear that in the intervening years she has quite literally been a whipping boy for Epps and the Mistress.EXT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/COTTON FIELD - DAYThe slaves are out working on the field.  Among their ranks is a white man, ARMSBY.  He is wholly unskilled at picking cotton, and he puts little effort into the job.  As we meet him he seems a decent sort if a little short on self-motivation.  In anachronistic terminology, he'd be called a "slacker."INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GIN HOUSE - EVENINGAs Epps said, it is days of long since.  The slaves are back to having their cotton weighed in the Gin HouseEPPSWiley...?TREACHTwo hundred sixty pounds.EPPSBob?TREACHThree hundred forty pounds for Bob.EPPSPatsey?TREACHFive hundred twenty pounds.EPPSPlatt?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   112.TREACHOne hundred sixty pounds.Before Treach is even done announcing the weight, Epps has pulled Solomon aside to where Uncle Abram already awaits his fate.EPPSArmsby?TREACHSixty four pounds.Epps speaks to Armsby sternly, but nothing of the manner in which he would address the slaves.EPPSA good days labor would average two hundred pounds.ARMSBYYes, sir.EPPSI'm sure in time y'll develope as a picker, but it takes effort, boy.  Put some damn effort into it.ARMSBYYes, sir.To Treach, regarding Solomon and Abram:EPPSTake 'em out.  Get to whippin'.No force is needed.  The slaves understand the situation.  They follow Treach out of the Gin house.EXT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTWe come in after the punishment has been dealt.  Patsey tends to Uncle Abram's back as Armsby applies liniments to Solomon's.  As he does, Armsby muses: ARMSBYIt's a tragedy.  How does such come to pass?  Working a field and picking cotton like a lowly hand.  I'm of a damn sight better station.  And my desires never lacked for imagination, though I will admit they have at times been short on ingenuity.  But only at times.  I've worked as an overseer, you know.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   113.SOLOMONI did not, sir.ARMSBYNot "sir."  Just Armsby.  Not owed more than any other in the field.  I worked plantations from Virginia, down into Alabama.  I could manage easy a hundred slaves and have done so.  But to toil in the field?  Never thought that would come to pass.  Never.  But times are desperate.  Where once I had said "no" to Epps and his merger offerings, I returned cap in hand.  ...Look at what I've become.SOLOMONHow did you arrive at such a place, if I may ask?ARMSBYAsk.  It's just conversation.From a pocket Armsby produces a flask.ARMSBY (CONT'D)I became a little too dependant on the whisky, a little too undependable on the job.  Before you say I'm just a sorry drunkard, let me state my case:  As reliable employment as overseeing is, it's no easy chore on the spirit.  I say no man of conscious can take the lash to another human day in, and day out without shredding at his own self.  Takes him to a place where he either makes excuses within his mind to be unaffected...  Or finds some way to trample his guilty sensations.  Well, I trampled.Armsby takes a drink.ARMSBY (CONT'D)And with frequency. SOLOMONWhere is your place of birth?ARMSBYMaryland.  Have you traveled there?SOLOMON...I cannot say that I have.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   114.ARMSBYFine country.  More seasonal than the bayou.  A deal less humid.  SOLOMONWhy did you leave it?ARMSBYTo make my fortune, of course.  I gave in to tales of wealth and prosperity that were the lore of the southern states: all that's needed being a patch of land and a few good growing seasons.  Cotton, or tobacco.  And then locating a proper bank to store your riches.  But such profitable outcomes are reserved for the plantation masters.  It's the lot of the rest of us to serve.  So I settled to be an overseer, and failed as well at that.  In the meantime my dreams gave way to reality.  Now, I want nothing more than to earn a decent wage.  And get myself home.Armsby takes another drink and leans back.ARMSBY (CONT'D)Oh, to be a nigger.  Not a concern in the world and every need taken care off.  Consider yourself fortunate, Platt.  It's the plight of the white to worry.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACKS - MORNINGWe again hear the sound of the HORN BLOWING signaling the start of the work day for the slave.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - DAYWith the sun yet again high in the sky the slaves are working the field picking cotton.  As before they sing a spiritual, the only thing that distracts them from the tedium at hand.  But there is no distracting from the heat.  We see Uncle Abram begin to falter and finally drop down to the ground.Treach calls to Edward: TREACHGet him water.Edward runs to fetch water which he carries to Abram and DUMPS ON HIM...BUT ABRAM DOES NOT RISE.  DOES NOT MOVE.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   115.At this point, the sounds of the singing from the others tapers off as they realize Abram isn't getting up.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - LATERWe are beyond the main of the plantation, the cotton field in the background.  Solomon, Bob and Wiley are digging a grave in the dirt.  The uncovered body of Abram lays near.  Having dug down an appropriate distance, the three men take the body and, very unceremoniously, place it into the ground.  That done, they begin to cover it with dirt.  It is all the more of a funeral that Abram will receive.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GIN HOUSE - EVENINGAs always, the day's pickings are again being weighed.TREACHOne hundred sixty pounds for Wiley.Clearly displeased, Epps pulls Wiley from the line.EPPSPlatt?TREACHEighty eight pounds for Platt.Epps moves to Solomon.  As way of explanation but with defiance:SOLOMON...We buried Abram today...EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GIN HOUSE - LATERWE MAKE A QUICK CUT TO THE OUTSIDE OF THE GIN HOUSE.  The reason for their low totals obviously doesn't matter as Solomon, Bob and Wiley receive a lashing for their lack of productivity.As the last lash falls on his back, Epps moves directly to Solomon.EPPSYou are a disgrace.  Unfit ta associate with a decent cotton-pickin' nigger.  The Lord don't ignore even the lowest of his animals.  But the Almighty hold you in such low regard He give you no skills.  None.  How miserable your shabbiness must be.(beat)12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   116.
(MORE)Get yerself clean.  We dance tonight.INT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTSolomon lays down, but can't rest.  The harshness of this life has mounted to the point he can take no more.    He gets up, he goes to RETRIEVE THE SMALL SACK IN WHICH HE KEEPS HIS EARNINGS AS WELL AS HIS LETTER.  But thinking better of it, Solomon returns the letter to hiding.  He takes the money with him and cautiously moves from the cabin.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - LATERSolomon is heading through the darkness toward another small cabin on the property.  There is the light of the lantern in the window.  Solomon steels himself, knocks on the door.  From inside we hear:ARMSBY (V.O.)Enter.INT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/ARMSBY'S SHACK - LATERThe door opens.  Solomon enters.  Armsby is surprised to see him.  So much so, he isn't sure what greeting to give.  Solomon gives a blunt introduction.  Re: the coins:SOLOMONThe proceeds of my fiddling performances.  A few picayunes, but all I have in the world.  I promise them to you if you will do me the favor I require.  But I beg you not to expose me if you cannot grant the request.ARMSBYWhat is it you ask?SOLOMONFirst, your word, sir.ARMSBYOn my honor.SOLOMONIt is a simple enough request.  I ask only that you deposit a letter in the Marksville post office.  And that you keep the action an inviolable secret forever.  The details of the letter are of no consequence.  Even at that, for me to write it would be a self-12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   117.EPPS (CONT'D)
(MORE)imposition of much pain and suffering.ARMSBYWhere's the letter now?SOLOMONIt is not yet composed.  I will have it in a day.  Two at most.Armsby considers the request.ARMSBYI will do as you ask.  And will accept whatever payment is offered.  Solomon hesitates.  In the moment, he's not so sure he can wholly give himself over to trust.ARMSBY (CONT'D)To assist you, I put my own self at risk.  I will do so, but not without fair compensation.Solomon hands over the money.ARMSBY (CONT'D)Compose your letter.  We will meet again.  In two days?SOLOMONIn two days.  ...Thank you.Solomon exits.INT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTSolomon rests but does not sleep.  He has set himself on a course, one from which there is no departure.EXT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/COTTON FIELD - DAYSolomon and the slaves pick cotton.  Armsby is conspicuously NOT laboring in the field.  As Solomon works he is watched by Epps.  Watched more than he normally is.  For a moment it seems it might just be a matter of perspective; Solomon's unease over his actions.  But soon Epps is joined by Armsby.  The two men stand and talk, their looks locked toward Solomon.Whatever it is that is occurring between them continues for a long, long moment.  But Epps makes no move toward Solomon.  Solomon continues with his work.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   118.SOLOMON (CONT'D)INT. EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - NIGHTThe slaves are at rests.  Gripping his whip Epps enters, without so much as a knock at the door.  For a moment there's curiosity; is he there for a dance, for Patsey...?Looking right to Solomon:EPPSGet up.Solomon does.  Epps heads back out into the dark.  He says nothing, but his directive is clear:  Follow me.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/SLAVE SHACK - CONTINUOUSSolomon comes out into the dark.  Nearly hidden in the shadows is a bitter Epps.  Despite the lack of light, Epps's malevolence is quite clear.  His whip twisting in his hand.EPPSWell, boy.  I understand I've got a larned nigger that writes letters and tries to get white fellows to mail 'em.Solomon, hardly missing a beat, plays this off.SOLOMONDon't know nothing about it, Master Epps.  Don't know nothing about it, sir.EPPSYah wasn't over with Armsby night before last?SOLOMONNo, master.EPPSHav'nt yah asked that fella to mail a letter fer yah at Marksville?Without overplaying things, Solomon gets real slick.SOLOMONWhy, Lord, master, I never spoke but three words to him in all my life.  I don't know what you mean.EPPSWell, Armsby tol' me today the devil was among my niggers.  That I had one that needed close watchin' or he would run away.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   119.
(MORE)When I axed him why, he said you come over to him and waked him up in the middle of the night and wanted him to carry a letter to Marksville.  What have yah got to say to that?SOLOMONAll I have to say, master, is all that need be said.  There is no truth in it.  How could I write a letter without ink or paper?  There is nobody I want to write to 'cause I hain't got no friends living as I know of.  That Armsby is a lying drunken fellow, they say, and nobody believes him anyway.  You know I always tell the truth, and that I never go off the plantation without your given word.  Now, master, I can see what that Armsby is after, plain enough.  Didn't he want you to hire him for an overseer?EPPS...Yes...SOLOMONThat's it.  He wants to make you believe we're all going to run away and then he thinks you'll hire an overseer to watch us.  He just made that story out of whole cloth, 'cause he wants to get a situation.  It's all a lie, master, you may depend on't.Epps shallow mind is so easily manipulated Solomon is able to work it as though he were performing origami.  We can nearly see Epps's thoughts being folded.EPPSI'm damned, Platt, if I don't believe you tell the truth.  He must take me for a soft, to think he can come it over me with them kind of yarns, musn't he?  Maybe he think he can fool me.  Maybe he thinks I don't know nothing...  Can't take care of my own niggers.  Soft soap old Epps.  Damn Armsby!  Set the dogs on him, Platt.  That filthy unloved bastard.  He will not separate me from my niggers.  I will drive him from my land before the sun comes over it.  Ohh, were he not free and white, Platt.  Were he not free and white.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   120.EPPS (CONT'D)Epps heads off to do as promised.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - NIGHTHaving found a lonely spot, Solomon has struck a small fire.  He has in his hand his letter.  With no ceremony, he casts it upon the flames and watches it burn.BLACKEXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - DAYIt's the Sabbath.  The slaves are left to themselves to do their own chores.  At the moment they are down by the river washing their clothes in the water.  Missing from the field of labor is Patsey, for whom Epps hollers.EPPSPatsey...  Patsey!Epps comes down to the bank and asks of the slaves:EPPS (CONT'D)Where is she?  Where is Patsey?No one answers.EPPS (CONT'D)Talk, Damn you!PHEBEWe have no knowledge of her, Massa.EPPSThe hell you don't!  You know where she is!  She run off, ain't she?  She's escaped, and you miserable black dogs stand like the deef and dumb.  My best cotton picking nigger!  My best.  I'd give yah all up for her.  Where she gone?Not a word spoken.  Epps wades in and among the slaves and begins to whip at them recklessly.EPPS (CONT'D)Speak!  Speak!The slaves say nothing.  There is nothing for them to say.  They don't know where she is.  Eventually Epps slows, then stops.  He drops down in great sorrow.  EPPS (CONT'D)She run off...  Pats run off.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   121.EXT. EPPS'S PLANTATION - LATEREpps sits on the piazza looking quite forlorn.  He looks up only to see Patsey returning to the plantation.  Epps steps up to greet her, with anger rather than relief.As they hear his angry voice, the slaves step around from where they are hanging their laundry to dry.EPPSRun off.  Run off, did you?PATSEYMassa Epps--EPPSYou miserable wench!  Where you been?PATSEYI been nowhere.EPPSLies to your misdeeds!PATSEYThe Sabbath day, Massa.  I took me a walk to commune wit da Lord.EPPSBring the Lord into yer deceptions?  Yah Godless...  Shaw's.  Comin' from Shaw's plantation weren't yah?PATSEY...No...EPPSYah didn't run, did yah?  Yah took yerself ta pleasure Shaw.  Yah gave baser passion to that unblushin' libertine!Solomon tries to intervene:SOLOMONMaster Epps--EPPSNow yah speak?  Now that yah want to add to 'er lies yah find yer tongue.Epps goes to strike Solomon, but Patsey pulls his arm back.PATSEYDo not strike him.  I went to Massa Shaw's plantation!12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   122.EPPSYah admit it.PATSEYFreely.  And you know why.Patsey takes soap from the pocket of her dress.PATSEY (CONT'D)I got this from Mistress Shaw.  Misstress Epps won't even grant me no soap ta clean with.  Stink so much I make myself gag.  Five hundred pounds 'a cotton day in, day out.  More than any man here.  And 'fo that I will be clean; that all I ax.  Dis here what I went to Shaw's 'fo.EPPSYou lie...PATSEYThe Lord knows that's all.EPPSYou lie!PATSEYAnd you blind wit yer own covetousness.  I don't lie, Massa.  If you kill me, I'll stick ta that.EPPSOh, I'll fetch you down.  I'll learn you to go to Shaw's.  Platt, run get four stakes and straps a leather.At first Solomon does not move.  Epps level all his rage at him:EPPS (CONT'D)Get them stakes!Solomon runs quickly to the tool shed.  In short order he returns with the stakes and a hammer.EPPS (CONT'D)Drive 'em into the ground.As Solomon does so, Epps gives an order to Wiley and Edward.EPPS (CONT'D)Strip her.  Strike her bare 'n lash her to the stakes.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   123.Mistress Epps has now come from the Great House.  She gazes on the scene with an air of heartless satisfaction.Now tied face down to the stakes, Epps stands over Patsey with his whip.EPPS (CONT'D)Yah done this to yerself, Pats!Epps hoists the whip to strike, holds it high...but no matter his rage, Epps cannot bring himself to deliver the blow.  He looks to Mistress Epps who now stands gloating and spurring him on.  MISTRESS EPPSDo it!  Strike the life from her.Epps again hoists the whip.  It trembles in his hand ahead of the act...  But he does not have it in him to deliver such a beating.   Turning to Solomon, thrusting the whip at him:EPPSBeat her.Solomon doesn't move.  Epps shoves the whip into his hand.EPPS (CONT'D)Give her the whip.  Give it all to her!Patsey, begging to Solomon:PATSEYI'd rather it you, Platt.EPPSStrike her, or yah'll get the same!Solomon takes a step back.  He unfurls the whip...  He begins to whip Patsey.  Lash after lash, Patsey squirms before it.  Epps eyes fill with tears, he is nearly too distraught to watch.But the Mistress...  She is not satisfied with Solomon's half-hearted effort.MISTRESS EPPSHe pantomimes.  There ain't barely a welt on her.  That's what your niggers make of yah; a fool fer the takin'.Epps's grief is replaced by fury.  Directly to Solomon:EPPSYah will strike her.  Yah will strike her until her flesh is rent 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   124.
(MORE)and meat and blood flow equal, or every nigger in my sight will die!Solomon can't do it, even if it means his life.  But from the ground, from Patsey:PATSEYDo it, Platt.  Don't stop until I am dead.What else can he do?  Solomon begins to whip, to truly whip Patsey.  Her back welts, then tears...  Patsey screams in agony.  Solomon strikes again and again...  After a full thirty lashes Solomon looks to Epps, who is not satisfied.EPPSUntil I say no more!  I ain't said nothing!Solomon strikes another ten to fifteen times.  By now, as promised, Patsey's back has been reduced to LITTLE MORE THAN TORN MEAT AND BLOOD.  Finally, Solomon tosses down the whip he can and will do no more.  EPPS (CONT'D)Strike her!  Strike her!Solomon will not.  Epps takes up the whip and whips Patsey with "ten fold" greater force than he had.  The painfully loud and angry curses of Epps load the air.  Patsey by now is terribly lacerated - Solomon describes without exaggeration literally flayed.  The lash wet with blood which flowed down her sides and dropped upon the ground.  At length Patsey ceases struggling.  Her head sinks listlessly on the ground.  Her screams and supplications gradually decrease and die away into a low moan.  It would seem that she was dying.Solomon, screaming at Epps:SOLOMONThou devil!  Sooner or later, somewhere in the course of eternal justice thou shalt answer for this sin.EPPSNo sin.  No more 'n if it'd kicked a chair that wouldn't stand right, or a stove that was no good for holdin' fire.  Things that give me consternation.  A man does how he pleases with his property.  At the moment, Platt, I am of great pleasure.  You be goddamn careful I don't come to wantin' to lightenin' my mood no further.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   125.EPPS (CONT'D)By contrast to this horror, the field of cotton smiles in the warm sunlight.  The birds chirp merrily amidst the foliage of the tress.  Peace and happiness seems to reign everywhere.Everywhere else.Epps leaves Patsey to herself.  He says not a word to the Mistress as he passes.  The Mistress herself heads back into the house.Solomon unties Patsey, lifts her and takes her to the cabin.INT. CABIN - LATERPatsey is laid on some boards where she remains for a long time with eyes closed and groaning in agony.   Phebe applies melted tallow to her wounds, and all try to assist and console her.In time Patsey opens her eyes.  She looks to Solomon.  She does not say a word.  She just looks at him...and then her eyes close again.BLACKEXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - DAYPlanks of wood are being delivered and unloaded.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - DAYThe slaves are now employed working on an extension to the Great House.  Overseeing the project is MR. AVERY.  The slaves themselves work under the direction of MR. BASS, a large man, between forty and fifty years old, of light complexion and light hair.  He is cool and self-possessed, fond of argument, but always speaking with extreme deliberation as well as a Canadian accent.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE - DAYAs the slaves continue to work, there is a conversation going on between Epps and Bass.  Bass much skilled in the art of sophistry, while Epps's arguments are fueled mostly by emotion alone.  Though at first Epps does little more than joke his way around the facts.Solomon, working still, can't help but overhear.BASSI tell you what it is, Epps.  It's all wrong.  All wrong, sir.  There's no justice nor 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   126.
(MORE)righteousness in slavery.  I wouldn't own a slave if I was rich as Croesus, which I am not, as is perfectly well understood.  More particularly among my creditors.  There's another humbug: the credit system.  Humbug, sir.  No credit, no debt.  Credit leads a man into temptation.  Cash down is the only thing that will deliver him from evil.  But this question of slavery; what right have you to your niggers when you come down to the point?EPPSWhat right?  I bought 'em.  I paid for 'em.BASSOf course you did.  The law says you have the right to hold a nigger, but begging the law's pardon...it lies.EPPSYou are daft.BASSYes, Epps, when the law says that it's a liar, and the truth is not in it.  Is everything right because the law allows it?  Suppose they'd pass a law taking away your liberty and making you a slave?EPPSThat ain't a supposable case.  Hope you don't compare me to a nigger, Bass.BASSIn the sight of God, what is the difference, Epps, between a white man and a black one?EPPSYah might as well ask what the difference is between a white man and a baboon.  Now, I seen one of them critters in Orleans that knowed just as much as any nigger I got.  Yah'd call them fellers citizens, I s'pose?BASSLook here, Epps.  You can't laugh me down in that way.  (pointed)Some men are witty, and some ain't 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   127.BASS (CONT'D)
(MORE)so witty as they think they are.  But let that pass.  These niggers are human beings.  If they don't know as much as their masters, whose fault is it?  They are not allowed to know anything.  You have books and papers, and can go where you please, and gather intelligence in a thousand ways.  But your slaves have no privileges.  You'd whip one of them if caught reading a book.  They are held in bondage, generation after generation, deprived of mental improvement.  Who can expect them to posses much knowledge  If they are not brought down to a level with the brute creation, you slaveholders will never be blamed for it.  If they are baboons, or stand no higher in scale of intelligence than such animals, you and men like you will have to answer for it.  There's a sin, a fearful sin, resting on this nation that will not go unpunished forever.  There will be a reckoning yet.The "funny" has completely gone out of the conversation for Epps.  Quite coldly:EPPSYou like to hear yourself talk, Bass, better than any man I know of.  Yah'd argue that black was white, or white black if anybody would contradict you.  A fine supposition if yah lived among Yankees in New England.  But yah don't.  You most assuredly do not.INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE/ADDITION - EVENINGSolomon and Bass are working together alone on the extension.  From the amount of work that's been done on it, it should be obvious that days have now passed.Solomon makes a cautious approach to Bass.  As casually as he can he inquires:SOLOMONMaster Bass, I want to ask you what part of the country you came from?BASSWhat put that into your head?12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   128.BASS (CONT'D)SOLOMONYou would know if I should tell you.BASSI was born in Canada.  Now guess where that is.SOLOMONOh, I know where Canada is.  I have been there myself.BASSHave you?SOLOMONMontreal and Kingston and Queenston and a great many places.  And I have been in York state, too.  Buffalo and Rochester and Albany, and can tell you the names of the villages on the Erie canal and the Champlain canal.Bass gives Solomon a long and curious stare.BASSWell traveled for a slave.  How came you here?SOLOMONMaster Bass, if justice had been done I never would have been here.BASSHow's this?  Tell me all about it.SOLOMONI am afraid to tell you, though I don't believe you would tell Master Epps if I should.BASSEvery word you speak is a profound secret.Solomon holds a moment.  Hasn't he heard the same promise before?  Prior to Solomon stating his case, WE FADE TO:BLACKINT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE/ADDITION - NIGHTThe dark has fallen.  Hours have passed.  Bass reflects on the story that Epps has told in the intervening.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   129.BASSHow many years all told?SOLOMONJust nearly...just passed eleven.BASSYour story is...it is amazing, and in no good way.SOLOMONDo you believe, sir, in justice as you have said?BASSI do.SOLOMONThat slavery is an evil that should befall none?BASSI believe so.SOLOMONIf you truly do, I would ask...I would beg that you write my friends in the north, acquainting them with my situation and beseeching them to forward free papers, or take such steps as they might consider proper to secure my release.Bass is somewhat overwhelmed by what Solomon has just told him.  It takes him a moment to reconcile its magnitude.BASSYou understand the danger of such an act in case of detection.  Your story, true or not; what we attempt is punishable in the strictest way.SOLOMONI understand.BASSAnd you understand as well the necessity of strict silence and secrecy.SOLOMONYes.BASSI need to take note; names and addresses of those you think can 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   130.
(MORE)aide you.  Not here, not now.  Can you sneak away in the night?INT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/KITCHEN - DAYFrom the kitchen, we see Solomon stealing a candle and some matches.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - NIGHTSolomon is alone in the dark at the riverbank.  He lights the candle.  Waits...  After a short while someone approaches.  Solomon nervously expects discovery, but it is Bass.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION - LATERBy the light of the candle Bass, armed with paper and a writing instrument, writes as Solomon gives him names.SOLOMON...William Perry, Cephas Parker and Judge Marvin, all of Saratoga Springs, Saratoga county, New York.  I had been employed by the later in the United States Hotel, and had transacted business with the former a considerable extent, and trust that at least one of them would be still living at that place.BASSIt is so many years since you left Saratoga.  All these men may be dead, or may have removed.  You say you obtained papers at the Custom House in New York.  Probably there is a record of them there.  And I think it would be well to write and ascertain.  I will take the letters to Marksville and post them from there.  After that, I must travel.  I will return to Marksville in ten week's time.  I will enquire then about responses before returning here.They sit on the banks quietly for a time as they absorb the enormity of their undertaking.  Finally, from Solomon, a hint of hopeful emotion creeps forth though it is dispensed in a very matter-of-fact fashion.SOLOMONIt would be unspeakable happiness to clasp my wife and family again.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   131.BASS (CONT'D)BLACKEXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/GREAT HOUSE/ADDITION - DAYThe addition is well on its way to being finished.  Slaves continue to work on it, Solomon in particular.  As they work, Bass comes riding up on a horse.  Solomon tries to remain calm but we can see the anxiety building in him.  Bass talks with Avery a bit, then makes his way casually to Solomon.  His news is not good.BASSNo letter yet, Platt.SOLOMONYou are certain?This hits Solomon hard.  Recovering, emphatic:SOLOMON (CONT'D)Write again.BASSNo use.  SOLOMONThere is every use.  My freedom.BASSNo use.  I have made up my mind to that.  I fear the Marksville post master will mistrust something, I have inquired so often at his office.  Too uncertain.  Too dangerous.  I have talked too openly of freedom for niggers.  I have concern for my own life now.  My beliefs have struck up against my fears.  I will be honest that my fears preside.Solomon just then begins to realize the finality of the situation.  The truth of that is clear, though Bass cannot articulate it.  Instead:BASS (CONT'D)I have a job or two on hand which can be completed shortly.  By that time I shall have a considerable sum of money, and then, Platt, I am leaving.  I have lived in this region long enough.  I am tired of slavery as well as you.  ...I go with a heavy heart that I could do no more for you.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   132.With much regret for his own failure of effort and spirit, Bass moves on.INT. MARKSVILLE POST OFFICE - DAYWe are in the office of MR. WADDILL, the Post Master of Marksville.  At the moment he is seated across from Mr HENRY NORTHUP.  The careful eye will recognize him.At the moment the conversation is regarding a book which Waddill holds - Uncle Tom's Cabin. WADDILLIt's liberal fantasy, of course.  Some call it literature.  To my way of thinking it's sedition.  Incredible that we have come this far.  Or sunk this low; there is a true and genuine market for such twaddle.  Dangerous days, sir.  Dangerous.  Far too much politickin'.  The Soft Shells, the Hard Shells, the Hunkers and Barn Burners and Woolly Heads and Silver Grays...  And the worst of the lot; the Free Soilers and the Abolitionists.  They take root like a malignant plant.  The north is lost to us.  No offense.Northup gives a noncommittal nod.WADDILL (CONT'D)It is the territories we must hang on to, now.  And by any measure.NORTHUPThe Free Soilers, the Abolitionists; you are liberated of such kind yourself?WADDILLDelightfully.  Never...but one here in Marksville.  An eccentric creature who preaches abolitionism as vehemently as any fanatic in the North I would imagine.  He is otherwise a generous, inoffensive man.  But always maintaining the wrong side of an argument.  It affords us a deal of amusement.  He is an excellent mechanic, and almost indispensable in the community.  He is a carpenter.  Name a Bass. NORTHUPHe has become familiar with me.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   133.Waddill gives a look, but before he can respond, Northup asks:NORTHUP (CONT'D)Where may I find this Mr. Bass?EXT. STREET - EVENINGBass is exiting his residence.  Northup, who has been waiting, calls to him.NORTHUPMr. Bass?Bass looks.  He does not recognize Northup and is cautious to say the least.BASSAre we acquainted?NORTHUPWe are not.  To the point:  Allow me to ask you if you were on Bayou Boeuf last August.BASSYes, sir.  I was there in August.NORTHUPDid you write a letter for a colored man at that place to some gentlemen in Saratoga Springs?BASSExcuse me, sir, if I say that is none of your business.NORTHUPPerhaps I'm rather hasty, Mr. Bass.  I beg your pardon.  But I have come from the state of New York to accomplish the purpose of the writer of a letter post marked at Marksville.  I am in search of Solomon Northup.  If you know him, I beg you to inform me frankly where he is, and I assure you the source of any information you may give me shall not be divulged if you desire it not to be.Bass considers his next words.BASSI have done nothing to be ashamed of.  I am the man who wrote the letter.  If you have come to rescue Solomon Northup, I am glad to see you.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   134.EXT. MASTER EPPS'S PLANTATION/FIELD - DAYThe Slaves are working in the field.  Solomon too focused on picking cotton to note the arrival of two men by carriage: Northup and the SHERIFF.While the Sheriff makes his way to the field, Northup remains with the carriage.  The Sheriff calls:SHERIFFPlatt...?  Where is the boy called Platt?SOLOMON...Sir...The Sheriff crosses to him.SHERIFFYour name is Platt, is it?SOLOMONYes, master.Pointing off to the distance.SHERIFFDo you know that man?Solomon looks toward the carriage.  He has to shield his eyes from the sun.  Recognition is slow coming to him.  But when it does, it hits him as a rush.SOLOMONHenry Northup...?Solomon starts for Northup, but he is pulled back by the Sheriff who is keen to determine Solomon's true identity.  As he does, Epps makes his way over.SHERIFFStop a moment.  Have you any other name than Platt?SOLOMONSolomon Northup is my name.EPPSSheriff...SHERIFFHave you a family?EPPSWhat's all this?SHERIFFIt is official business.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   135.EPPSMy nigger, my business.SHERIFFYour business waits.(to Solomon)Tell me of your family.SOLOMONI have a wife and three children.SHERIFFWhat were their names?SOLOMONElizabeth, Margaret and Alonzo.SHERIFFAnd your wife's name before her marriage?SOLOMONAnne Hampton.  I am who I say.Solomon pushes past the sheriff.  As Solomon moves toward Northup, his pace quickens with each step until his personal velocity has him nearly at a dead run.  The two old friends make contact with each other, wrap each other in a long and emotional embrace.  It if finally broken by Epps, who has moved over with the Sheriff.EPPSNah...  You will unhand 'em.  Platt is my nigger!NORTHUPHe is Solomon Northup.EPPSYou say...NORTHUPHe belongs to no man.EPPSYou say!  You come here, unfamiliar to me, and make claims.SHERIFFNot claims.  I have no doubts.EPPSTo hell with that!  My nigger, and I'll fight you for 'em!NORTHUPAs is your right.  As it will be my pleasure to bankrupt you in the courts.  Your decision.12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   136.Epps stews for a moment, then seethes toward Solomon:EPPSYou damned me since you darkened my eaves.  Glad to be done with yah.(to Northup)Take 'em!SHERIFFIf you know what's wise...we'll leave.The trio starts for the carriage.  Solomon is pulled back by the call of Patsey's voice:PATSEYPlatt...NORTHUPWe need to make haste.Disregarding Northup, Solomon crosses over to Patsey.  For a moment they just stand across from each other.  Under the circumstances, neither really knows how to engage.  Finally, suddenly, Patsey throws her arms around Solomon and they embrace. With all the pain in his heart:A moment longer they hold each other.  They separate, Solomon heading back to the carriage.  He and Northup alight, the Sheriff taking the reigns.  The Sheriff chides the horses and they start up.  As they move on, Patsey sinks down to the ground, where she remains in a weary and half-reclining state, the other slaves around her.WE STAY WITH HIM as he travels further and further from the slaves - who are diminished by distance.  Solomon waves a hand to them, but the carriage rounds a bend and a thicket of trees hides them from his eyes forever more.BLACKINT. NORTHUP HOUSE - DAYIt is a scene reminiscent of the top of the show.  The Northup family gathered.  Anne, again, in her finest attire.  We see, also, the Northup children: Elizabeth, who is now twenty two, Margaret who is now twenty -SHE CARRIES WITH HER A BUNDLE - and Alonzo who is seventeen.  Also present is MARGARET'S HUSBAND.  The family waits patiently, dutifully...but anxiously.THE DOOR TO THE ROOM OPENS.  It is Mr. Northup.  He looks from face to face, makes sure all are prepared for what's to come.  Northup steps from the room.  ...A moment later SOLOMON ENTERS.  He is clean, well dressed, but he bears the scares of his time away.  12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   137.Anne rises to greet him, but holds back.  All around, the body language of the family is stiff and awkward.  They are, after all - after twelve years - little more than familiar strangers.In an effort to minimize the shock of the moment, Solomon tries to remain emotionally detached.  To Anne:SOLOMONI apologize for my appearance.  I have had a difficult time of things these past many years.Solomon looks among his family.  Trying to recall them as much as they look to see familiarity within him.SOLOMON (CONT'D)Elizabeth.  Margaret.  Alonzo.  You do not recognize me, do you?  How could you?  When I was removed you were but seven; a little prattling girl playing with her toys.  Now...you've grown to womanhood.  And who is this?MARGARETHe is my husband.SOLOMONHusband?MARGARET'S HUSBANDIt is very good to meet you, sir.Solomon almost breaks, but he keeps himself together.SOLOMONWe have much acquainting to do. Margaret rises, she presents her bundle to her father.MARGARETAnd this is your grandson.  Solomon Northup Staunton.SOLOMON...Solomon...MARGARETWe would have no other name for him.  No other.As much as Solomon was trying to keep his emotions in check, the sight of his grandson...  The fact his grandson carries his name, is overwhelming.  Solomon breaks down.  Emotionally, physically...  But ANNE IS THERE TO CATCH HIM.  To lift his body and his spirit.  But even at that their "embrace" remains a bit chaste, slightly formal.  But has she holds him, Anne's fingers BRUSH THE BURNS ON SOLOMON'S LEFT FOREARM.  She pushes up 12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   138.Solomon's sleeve, she looks at the marks, the flower...  Anne know exactly what it means and why it is on his arm.  In that instant Solomon can no longer maintain his cool facade.  The moment so very overwhelming, Solomon seeks solace in it.  He says to Anne with all his heart:  SOLOMONForgive me.ANNEThere is nothing to forgive.The pair, joined now by the whole family, hold on to each other for life...and one would think for all the rest of their lives.FADE TO:BLACKEND12 Years a Slave  05.18.11   139.